The co-occurrence of mtDNA mutations on different oxidative phosphorylation subunits, not detected by haplogroup analysis, affects human longevity and is population-specific. Nicola Raule, Federica Sevini, Shengting Li, Annalaura Barbieri, Federica Tallaro, Laura Lomartire, Dario Vianello, Alberto Montesanto, Jukka S. Moilanen, Vladyslav Bezrukov, Helene Blanche, Antti Hervonen, Kaare Christensen, Luca Deiana, Efstathios S. Gonos, Tom B. L. Kirkwood, Peter Kristensen, Alberta Leon, Pier Giuseppe Pelicci Michel Poulain, Irene M. Rea, Jose Remacle Jean Marie Robine Stefan Schreiber Ewa Sikora Peternella Eline Slagboom Liana Spazzafumo Maria Antonietta Stazi Olivier Toussaint James W. Vaupel Giuseppina Kari Majamaa Markus Perola Thomas E. Johnson Lars Bolund Huanming Yang Giuseppe Passarino and Claudio Franceschi.

To re-examine the correlation between mtDNA variability and longevity, we examined mtDNAs from samples obtained from over 2200 ultranonagenarians (and an equal number of controls) collected within the framework of the GEHA EU project. The samples were categorized by high-resolution classification while about 1300 mtDNA molecules (650 ultranonagenarians and an equal number of controls) were completely sequenced. Sequences made it possible to evaluate for the first time the cumulative effects of specific concomitant mtDNA mutations including those that per se have a low or very low impact. In particular, the analysis of the mutations occurring in different OXPHOS complexes showed a complex scenario with a different mutation burden in 90+ subjects with respect to controls. These findings suggested that mutations in subunits of the OXPHOS complex I had a beneficial effect on longevity while the simultaneous presence of mutations in complex I and III (which also occurs in J subhaplogroups involved in LHON) and in complex I and V seemed to be detrimental, likely explaining previous contradictory results. On the whole, our study, which goes beyond haplogroup analysis, suggests that mitochondrial DNA variation does affect human longevity, but its effect is heavily influenced by the interaction between mutations concomitantly occurring on different mtDNA genes.

Biophysics and Biocomplexity and Department of Experimental Pathology, C.I.G. Interdepartmental Centre L. Galvani for Integrated Studies on Bioinformatics, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. BGI Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. Department of Cell Biology, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy. Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and MRC Oulu, Oulu, Finland. Institute of Gerontology, Kiev, Ukraine. Centre Polymorphisme Humaine, Fondation Jean Dausset, Paris, France. University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland. Institute of Public Health, University of Southern Denmark, Odense Denmark. University of Sassari, Sassari Italy. National Hellenic Research Foundation, Athens Greece. School of Clinical Medical Sciences Gerontology Henry Wellcome University of Newcastle upon Tyne Newcastle upon Tyne NEBZ UK. University of Aarhus Aarhus Denmark. Research & Innovation Soc.Coop. a r.l., Padova Italy. Research Centre of Demographic Management for Public UCLG AP Louvain-la-Neuve Belgium The Queens University Belfast Belfast BTNN UK Eppendorf Array Technologies SAEAT Research and Development Namur Belgium University of Montpellier Val dAurelle Cancer Research Center, Montpellier, France. Kiel Center for Functional Genomics, University Hospital Schleswig Holstein, Kiel, Germany.

Keywords: genetics of longevity; longevity; mitochondrial DNA; mtDNA sequencing; oxidative phosphorylation.

Introduction

Research on mitochondrial biology has underlined the central role played by the mitochondrion in a number of complex traits, including aging and metabolic and degenerative diseases. Mitochondria, due to their central position between energy uptake and energy production, are involved in a number of cellular processes such as heat production, apoptosis regulation, and cellular differentiation. In addition, mitochondria are responsible for the production and regulation of the most important by-product of cellular metabolism, reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are widely considered to be one of the main causes of aging (for a review see Passarino et al., 2010; Wallace, 2010). Most of the proteins determining the biology of mitochondria Correspondence Giuseppe Passarino, Department of Cell Biology, University of Calabria, 87036, Rende, Italy. Tel.: +39 0984 492932; fax: +39But are not associated with any of the haplogroups. Here, we present the results of a very large study where over 2200 subjects older than 90 years were recruited within the framework of the Genetics of Healthy Ageing (GEHA) EU project (Skytthe et al., 2011) and coming from most of the European populations, were compared with a similar number of younger controls matched for sex and geographical origins. The frequencies of mtDNA haplogroups in 90+ and controls are summarized in Table 1 and, separately for men and women, in Table S1. We observed that in females, the haplogroups H2 and T2 are more frequent in the 90+ group than in controls (P = 0.002 and 0.02, respectively). On the other hand, among male controls, the frequency of haplogroups H1 and J2 was higher than in the 90+ group (P = 0.023 and 0.004, respectively). No association was detectable when multiple test corrections were used.

The mtDNA sequences have been deposited in GenBank, with accession numbers JX152783 and JX154074. To analyze the mtDNA sequences, we first compared all complete sequences with the reference sequence (rCRS). A summary of all identified mutations is shown in Table S2. The analysis of single mutations did not highlight any specific mutation that could consistently account for an advantage in longevity. Thus, we analyzed the possibility that nonsynonymous mutations may alter specific genes and affect the chances of attaining extreme longevity. We analyzed mtDNA sequences of ultranonagenarians and controls to find an aggregate mtDNA variation associated with longevity. To avoid false-positive results as much as possible, the analysis of mtDNA sequences was carried out using a gene-based kernel approach (Wu et al., 2011), adjusted for genetic ancestry by means of principal component analysis according to Biffi et al. (2010) and corrected for multiple testing (number of genes analyzed). In our case, we considered a gene as all the subunits encoded by mtDNA and belonging to a single complex of OXPHOS (ND 1-6 and ND4L are in complex I, Cyt b in complex III, COI-III in complex IV, ATPase 6 and 8 in complex V). Table 2 reports the results of the gene-based analysis, while Fig. S1 shows the results of the underlying principal component analysis.

Table 2 clearly shows that nonsynonymous mutations falling within Complex I, III and V are associated with longevity in our sample. By contrast, there was no correlation between synonymous mutations falling in different subunits whether mutations falling in different complexes have a positive or negative effect, we compared 90+ and controls in different populations for nonsynonymous mutations in genes belonging to the mitochondrial complex that was significantly associated with longevity upon the gene-based sequence analysis above (Fig. 1). When we considered the subunits of complex I, all three populations showed a difference between 90+ and controls. However, the frequency of nonsynonymous mutations was higher in controls than in the 90+ belonging to Danish and southern European populations (respectively, P = 0.03 in Denmark and P << 0.001 in South Europe), while in the Finnish population, we observed no difference.

The results are reinforced by the specific attention to the recruitment procedure aimed at minimizing population sampling bias stipulated by the GEHA project (see Experimental procedures). On the other hand, it must be acknowledged that cases and controls come from different birth cohorts, as it happens for studies on longevity, and this may represent a limitation. Given the absolute linkage among mtDNA mutations, we investigated whether the different results obtained in our samples (with Finns showing a different trend with respect to other samples) could be due to a different distribution of the simultaneous mutations in subunits of different complexes. As most of the samples showed at least one mutation in both complexes I and III, for each sample, we counted the subjects where we observed two or more mutations in the subunits of both complex I and complex III (Table 3a). Indeed, we observed that when controls are considered, both Danes and southern Europeans show a higher frequency of the simultaneous presence of two mutations in complex I and III than Finns (P = 0.04 and P = 0.006, respectively). The same result was obtained when complex I and V were considered (Table 3b). In both cases, the number of subjects with two or more mutations in complex I and III or in complex I and V was higher in controls than in ultranonagenarians (P = 0.03 and P = 0.02, respectively).

The analysis of haplogroups showed that haplogroups H2 and T2 are associated with longevity in females. HaplogHowever, complex I exhibited a higher mutation frequency in the 90+ group than in controls in Finns (suggesting that mutations in these subunits may be beneficial). But it showed more mutations in controls than in 90+ in Danish and southern Europeans (suggesting that mutations in the subunits of complex I may be detrimental). On the other hand, for complexes III and V, Danes and southern Europeans had a similar trend with more nonsynonymous mutations in controls than in ultranonagenarians, while Finns showed no differences between ultranonagenarians and controls for both complexes. The analysis of the simultaneous presence of mutations on both complexes I and III and in both complexes I and V suggests that the presence of a mutation on complex I may be beneficial for longevity. While the co-occurrence of mutations on both complexes I and III or on both I and V might lower the individual's chances for longevity. It might be worth mentioning in this context that studies on the molecular basis of LHON showed that the penetrance of LHON mutations is greatly increased by the concomitant occurrence of mutations on complexes I and III defining specific J subhaplogroups, such as J1c and J2b (Carelli et al., 2006; Achilli et al., 2012). Accordingly, this result might explain why the J haplogroup is associated with longevity in some populations but not in others. In populations where J subhaplogroups with additional mutations in complex III (or complex V) are more frequent, we may expect to find no association between J and longevity. Similarly, to what has been reported regarding the absence of correlation between haplogroup J and LHON in populations where these subhaplogroups are not present (Carelli et al., 2006). Indeed previous analyses had shown that haplogroup J is associated with longevity in Finns but not in southern Italians (De Benedictis et al., 1999; Niemi et al., 2003; Dato et al., 2004). Based on our results, we can hypothesize that mutations in complex I may decrease the rate of OXPHOS. Possibly by slowing the initiation rate of the electron transport chain, thus leading to lower production of both ATP and ROS, as suggested in an in vitro study by Bellizzi et al. (2012). In contrast, the impairment of supercomplex III (or complexes I and V) can affect the activity of OXPHOS by decreasing (or, at worst, blocking) the initiated electron transport chain. Leading to higher ROS production and/or hyperpolarization of the mitochondrial membrane (Wallace, 2005). This hypothesis takes into account available data but will certainly need to be studied in vivo using appropriate models with specific mutations. In fact, our results are based on the different genetic burden of NS mutations in 90+ participants when compared with controls. But they are limited to explaining epistatic interactions and the real effect of the mutations. Future work will need to better characterize the molecular effects of single mutations. Moreover, it will be important also to better analyze the interaction between these mutations and mutations in the regulatory region affecting mtDNA expression. As the 295C/T transition which was shown to affect mitochondrial transcription and copy number in cybrid models and is typical of haplogroup J (Suissa et al., 2009). Within GEHA, families with two or more siblings 90 years old or older were identified with different strategies depending on the available information on the population. Once identified, individuals were contacted, and an appointment was made to visit the individual in his or her usual place of residence. During the visit, a structured interview was conducted based on a standardized questionnaire, and blood samples consisting of three 7.5 mL EDTA tubes of blood were collected from each participant. For this study, we used only the older brother of each sibship. It is also worth mentioning that the availability of complete sequences allowed us to evaluate the frequency of mutations previously reported to be associated with degenerative diseases in 90+ and controls (Table S3). Unexpectedly, such mutations are present in the 90+ group sometimes at higher frequencies than in controls. For instance, the 4336T>C mutation in the tRNAgln has been found to be more frequent in patients with AD than in controls by a number of studies between 1993 and 2010 (Shoffner et al., 1993; Hutchin & Cortopassi, 1995; Brown et al., 1996; Santoro et al., 2010). We found this mutation to be twice as frequent in 90+ than in controls. Similarly, many other supposed deleterious mutations have been found to be quite frequent in 90+. These results support the idea that certain mtDNA-inherited mutations could contribute to longevity or disease according to population- and individual-specificIn this study, the DNA molecule of both northern and southern European populations was examined. The mtDNA subhaplogroup was determined for 2947 samples (1449 ultranonagenarians and 1498 controls) to verify haplogroup association with longevity and to compare haplogroup distribution among different European countries. Complete sequencing was performed using two different methods that were compared for reliability of results by parallel testing samples. A total of 125 sequences (109 Calabrians and 16 Greeks) were obtained using the MitoALL Resequencing kit (Applera, Foster City, USA) with four alternative primer pairs introduced to improve the cation rate. Each amplification step was followed by purification with EXOSAPit (U.S. Biochemical, Cleveland, Ohio), and the sequencing reaction was conducted using the BigDye Kit, version (Applera), and M13 universal primers (forward and reverse). The obtained consensus sequence was aligned and compared with the Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS, NCBI: NC_012920.1 106) (Andrews et al., 1999) using SEQSCAPE, version 2.5 software (Applera), which allows assembly of all 46 fragments belonging to the sample. Two independent operators verified sequences for phantom mutations by reading both strands. The remaining samples were sequenced in Beijing Genomics Institute (BGI) as previously described (Wang et al., 2008). Furthermore, this study showed that mtDNA mutations previously associated with a number of degenerative disorders are present in ultranonagenarians and in some cases even at higher frequencies than controls. This suggests that mtDNA mutations can be positive or negative according to other factors, most likely environmental factors as well as other mitochondrial and genomic backgrounds.

The samples were collected within the framework of the GEHA research project (2004-2010) in 11 European countries. Each institution providing blood samples received approval from its own ethical committee, and all the recruited subjects provided written informed consent for the use of their phenotypic and genetic data in studies on human aging (Skytthe et al., 2011). The definition of the mtDNA subhaplogroups in the remaining 2947 samples was conducted by resequencing the D-loop region from nucleotide position (np) 16024 to np 576 followed by RFLP analysis in specific coding region traits as previously described (Torroni et al., 1996).

The haplogroup and subhaplogroup assignment followed the Phylotree nomenclature (www.phylotree.org) (van Oven & Kayser, 2009). Since there were many samples to classify, a custom tree search algorithm was developed that, coupled with a highly-efficient SNP discovery pipeline, is able to define the haplogroup that better matches the sample mutational motifs starting from the raw sequence in FastA format (Vianello et al., 2013).

R statistical software was used for all statistical analyses. mtDNA subhaplogroups and relevant frequencies were stratified by gender and compared between 90+ subjects and their ethnically matched controls using the chi-squared test with Pearson correction or Fisher's exact test. The comparison of frequencies in 90+ and younger controls of each mtDNA subhaplogroup was computed by applying Pearson's chi-squared test with Yates continuity correction. Tests for statistical significance were two-sided with a = 0.05.

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References:
Achilli A, Iommarini L, Olivieri A, Pala M, Hooshiar Kashani B, Reynier P, La Morgia C, Valentino ML, Liguori R, Pizza F, Barboni P, Sadun F, De Negri AM, Zeviani M, Dollfus H, Moulignier A, Ducos G, Orssaud C, Bonneau D, Procaccio V, Leo-Kottler B, Fauser S, Wissinger B, Amati-Bonneau P, Torroni A, Carelli V (2012) Rare primary mitochondrial DNA mutations and probable synergistic variants in Lebers hereditary optic neuropathy. PLoS ONE 7:e42242.

Beekman M, Blanche H, Perola M, Hervonen A, Bezrukov V, Sikora E, Flachsbart F, Christianse D rae J,Kirkwoo B ,Re M,Poulai ,Robin M,Valensin S, Stazi MA, Passarino G, Deiana L, Gonos ES, Paternoster L, Srensen TI, Tan Q, Helme vande kke B,Deele ,Martell ,Cordel J,Ayer L,Vaupe W,Tornwall O, Johnson TE, Schreiber S,Lathpopulation was used to perform rare-variant association testing for sequencing data. The aim was to identify rare mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variants that contribute to human longevity. To achieve this, the SKAT algorithm was employed as a supervised and flexible regression method to test for associations between rare variants in a gene or genetic region and continuous/dichotomous traits. The SKAT algorithm is implemented in the SKAT package of R and is capable of dealing with variants that have different directions and magnitudes of effects, allowing for covariate adjustment and avoiding arbitrary selection of a threshold in burden tests. Gene-based analysis was adjusted for the first four principal components derived from principal component analysis, as described previously. To compute the SKAT P-values, a resampling procedure based on 10,000 bootstraps was used. The function that measures the genetic similarity between two random subjects in the analyzed region via the P selected markers was the weighted linear kernel function. As suggested by Wu et al. (2011), the diagonal weight matrix was chosen using the beta distribution density function with parameters a1 = 1 and a2 = 25 evaluated at the sample minor-allele frequency or MAF (default option of SKAT package of R).

Acknowledgments: The study received support from the GEHA Project, which was funded through Priority 1 (Life Sciences, Genomics and Biotechnology for Health) of European Union's FP6, Project Number LSHM-CT-2004-503270. The research also received funding from the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2011) under Grant Agreement No 259679.

Several studies have associated mitochondrial DNA inherited variants with successful aging and longevity in humans. These studies include Domínguez-Garrido et al. (2012), Greaves and Turnbull (2009), Hutchin and Cortopassi (1995), Ivanova and Lepage (2011), Lagouge and Larsson (2013), Man et al. (2004), Moilanen et al. (2003), Montiel-Sosa et al. (2006), Niemi et al. (2003), Passarino et al. (2001), Pinós et al. (2014), Ross et al. (2001), Ruiz-Pesini et al. (2000), Santoro et al. (2006, 2010), Shoffner et al. (1993), Skytthe et al. (2011), Suissa et al. (2009), Tanaka et al. (1998, 1999), Torroni et al. (1999, 2001), Vianello et al. (2013), and Wallace (1999a, 1999b). These studies have explored the role of mitochondrial DNA mutations, haplogroups, and variants in several diseases and conditions related to aging, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Leber hereditary optic neuropathy, and schizophrenia.

Overall, the variability of mitochondrial genomes in human aging seems to play a crucial role in the onset and progression of age-related diseases and conditions, as well as in longevity and healthy aging.Individual. Nature, Wu MC, Lee S, Cai T, Li Y, Boehnke M, Lin X (2011) Rare-variant association testing for sequencing data with the sequence kernel association test. Am. J. Hum. Genet., Zheng X, Levine D, Shen J, Gogarten SM, Laurie C, Weir BS (2012) A high-performance computing toolset for relatedness and principal component analysis of SNP data. Bioinformatics, Mitochondrial DNA inherited variants are associated with successful aging and longevity in humans. FASEB J. 13, 1532-1536. Rig T, Nogales-Gadea G, Ruiz JR, Rodriguez-Romo G, Santiago-Dorrego C, Fiuza-Luces C, Gomez-Gallego F, Cano-Nieto A, Garatachea N, Moran M, Angel Martin M, Arenas J, Andreu AL, Lucia A (2012) Are mitochondrial haplogroups associated with extreme longevity? A study on a Spanish cohort. Age 34, 227-233. B, Martin MV, Sequeira PA, Moon EA, Morgan LZ, Watson SJ, Schatzberg A, Akil H, Myers RM, Jones EG, Wallace DC, Bunney WE, Vawter MP (2009) Mitochondrial variants in schizophrenia,bipolar disorder,and major depressive disorder.Supporting Information: Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article at the publisher's website. Fig. S1 Scatterplot of the first two principal component scores based on the 229 SNPs (MAF > 0.01) identified in the 1291 mtDNA analyzed sequences. Table S1a and b. Haplogroup distribution in males and females. Table S2. List of all the mutations identified in our sample by the complete mtDNA sequencing. Table S3. mtDNA mutations found in our study and previously associated with diseases. Table S4. Distribution of 90+ and controls from different centers in the GEHA project. Table S6. Modified primer pairs for complete resequencing.