there are any age-related changes in gene expression that are not associated with familial longevity. 

Gene expression analysis was conducted on the mTOR pathway to investigate its association with human longevity. The mTOR pathway consists of two complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2, with different functions. The main functions of mTORC1 include translation initiation, protein synthesis, and autophagy, while those of mTORC2 include cytoskeletal organization. The two complexes are connected in that mTORC2 regulates Akt phosphorylation, part of an upstream pathway that controls activation of mTORC1. Inhibition of the mTOR signaling pathway in model organisms results in lifespan extension and improved metabolic function. Additionally, reduced mTOR signaling is associated with a reduction in age-associated cancer incidence and growth rate. 

The study investigated whether transcriptional variation within the mTOR pathway is associated with human longevity using whole-blood samples from the Leiden Longevity Study, a cohort of Dutch families with extended survival across generations and beneficial metabolic profiles in middle-age. The mRNA levels of nonagenarians and middle-aged controls were compared, and the mTOR signaling gene set was found to associate with old age. Seven of 40 mTOR pathway genes had a significant differential expression of at least 5%, and the RPTOR (Raptor) gene was found to be differentially expressed also when the offspring of nonagenarians was compared with their spouses, indicating association with familial longevity in middle-age. This association was not explained by variation between the groups in the prevalence of type 2 diabetes and cancer or glucose levels. 

In conclusion, the study shows that the mTOR pathway not only plays a role in the regulation of disease and aging in animal models but also in human health and longevity.Differential expression of these genes does not simply indicate old age but is a defining characteristic of the long-lived families in middle age. Finally, we examined whether the association between the expression of mTOR signaling genes and longevity is independent of metabolic health parameters, namely plasma glucose levels and the prevalence of type 2 diabetes and cancer, as these factors are known characteristics of long-lived families and are suggested to be influenced by mTOR signaling.

Gene expression in whole blood: nonagenarians vs. controls
We measured gene expression levels for each of the 40 mTOR signaling genes using RT-qPCR on whole blood samples from 87 LLS nonagenarians, 337 of their middle-aged offspring, and 321 middle-aged LLS controls (Table 1). When comparing long-lived individuals to younger controls, differentially expressed genes may associate either with calendar age, familial longevity or both. We tested the total gene set for such association using the globaltest method (Goeman & Oosting, 2011). We observed that the gene expression levels of the mTOR signaling gene set did associate significantly with age and/or familial longevity in these families (P = 4.6 x 10^-7).

Second, to investigate which genes are primarily responsible for this association, single-gene analysis using linear regression was performed on all 40 mTOR signaling genes (Table 2). After Bonferroni correction for multiple testing, seven genes showed significant differential expression with at least a 5% expression difference: FOXO1 and RPTOR.

Table 1: Analyzed samples: Gene expression
Results
Samples Number Mean age Age range Men/women Long-lived individuals 87 94.3 89-102 40/47 Offspring 337 61.3 34-78 194/143 Controls 321 61.2 32-81 146/175

Selection of mTOR pathway genes
For the mTOR pathway, we selected 40 genes encoding proteins that belong to the well-described core of the mammalian mTOR pathway.

Table 2: Linear regression results of gene expression of long-lived individuals compared with controls
Genes simultaneously in one test (P-value < 0.05 for significance) (Supplementary Table S2). We observed a significant association of genetic variation in the mTOR pathway as a whole with familial longevity (P = 0.009). However, the single-gene analysis (of 40 SNP sets), for which the significance level for P-values after Bonferroni correction for multiple testing is 0.00125, did not result in significant associations. (Supplementary Table S3), suggesting that effects of single common variation in mTOR signaling genes on familial longevity are very small.

Table 3: Linear regression results of gene expression of offspring compared with controls
To investigate whether the differences in expression of the seven genes differentially expressed between nonagenarians and controls are a characteristic of the long-lived families and not just a marker of old age, we compared their expression in the middle-aged offspring of nonagenarians to the controls of similar age (Supplementary Table S5). While the association for six genes was not significant after correction for multiple testing, as compared to the controls, the offspring expressed significantly less RPTOR mRNA (Table 3). Thus, in two generations, RPTOR gene expression was decreased as compared to controls. As association of PRR5L was borderline significant and displayed the largest effect size (FC = 0.74), we also included PRR5L for further follow-up in this article. Gene expression levels of PRR5L were increased in nonagenarians but decreased in their offspring. The gene expression differences between offspring and control groups may be due to variation in gene expression level or could (partially) be explained by differences between the groups in blood cell subsets or disease prevalence.

Relation of gene expression in whole blood with cell subtypes
Whole blood consists of several cell subtypes and subsets of differentiated immune cells that may have different mRNA expression profiles. To investigate whether the proportions of different blood cell types could explain differential expression levels of RPTOR and PRRL5, the comparisons between offspring and controls were corrected for the relative counts of leukocytes, thrombocytes, neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, basophils, and eosinophils present in the whole blood samples (see Experimental procedures). We observed that variation between cell counts in offspring and controls did not influence the associations of gene expression with familial longevity.

Since we had GWAS data available in the LLS study, we analyzed the set of GWAS-based SNPs within a 10-kb window around the 40 mTOR signaling genes for differences in variation between 417 unrelated nonagenarian participants and 476 younger controls from the LLS (Supplementary Table S1) (Deelen et al., 2011a). Using the PLINK setcorresponding proteins of both complexes, as well as the upstream regulators of mTORC1 and mTORC2. Finally, we added the proteins that interact with mTORC1 and mTORC2, which are involved in the regulation of autophagy, mRNA translation, metabolism, cell cycle and apoptosis (Wullschleger et al., 2006).

We performed a genetic approach to compare nonagenarians and controls. The mTOR gene set variation was associated with longevity in the LLS due to the contribution of small effects in several genes. This association couldn't pinpoint the main effector genes or SNPs; therefore, we concluded that this finding must be replicated in much larger studies to test whether genetic variation in the pathway and specific genes truly associate with familial longevity.

Decreased mTORC1 protein activity is associated with lower glucose levels and a lower prevalence of diabetes in humans (Liu et al., 2004; Krebs et al., 2007), while impaired mTORC2 is associated with glucose intolerance and insulin resistance (Lamming et al., 2012). The offspring of nonagenarian siblings in the LLS have a lower prevalence of diabetes and lower glucose levels than similarly aged controls. Since adjustment for glucose levels and excluding diabetic patients provides similar associations, differences in the prevalence of type 2 diabetes or plasma glucose levels between offspring and controls did not explain the association of RPTOR and PRR5L mRNA level with familial longevity.

Remarkable changes in effect size were found for RPTOR when considering T-cell differentiation markers (Table S4). Our results could be explained if RPTOR gene expression in blood marks familial longevity and metabolic health in middle-age and would thus be an early marker of familial longevity. The altered gene expression levels in the longevity family members may be the consequence of aging, or merely a trait shared by the long-lived families, or may truly contribute to human longevity. In view of the findings in animal models (Vellai et al., 2003; Kapahi et al., 2004; Kaeberlein et al., 2005; Harrison et al., 2009), it is not unlikely that a familial and genetic background contributing to low mTORC1 signalling activity (and preservation of low mTOR throughout life) contributes to metabolic health and an extended life expectancy across species.

Since in the literature expression levels of mTOR pathway proteins have been implicated in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes (Newgard et al., 2009) and progression of cancer (Guertin & Sabatini, 2005; Stanfel et al., 2009) and since the prevalence of diabetes differed between LLS offspring and controls (Westendorp et al., 2009), we tested whether RPTOR and PRR5L expression were simply marking differences in disease prevalence. We therefore performed the same analysis between offspring and controls without known diabetics and cancer patients, which yielded similar associations to those described above (Supplementary Table S6).

In our study, we found RPTOR, AKT1S1, and EIF4EBP1 to be associated with old age and/or familial longevity, and the directions of association indicate a transcriptional down-regulation of mTORC1. Even in middle-age, a down-regulation of RPTOR mRNA was associated with familial longevity, providing another example of the highly conserved role mTOR signalling has in lifespan regulation across different species.

Because glucose levels differed between offspring and controls (Supplementary Table S5), we investigated whether the mRNA differences of RPTOR and PRR5L depended on glucose levels in non-diabetic participants. The association of familial longevity with RPTOR was not affected by adjustment for glucose levels, and the association with PRR5L expression gained significance (Supplementary Table S7). Thus, the expression level of the RPTOR gene in blood marks familial longevity independent of the prevalence of type 2 diabetes and cancer and glucose levels. Due to the influence of T-cell differentiation, glucose levels, and diabetes prevalence on its gene expression, the association of PRR5L with familial longevity is more complex.

Not only mTORC1, but also mTORC2 activity has been linked to health and lifespan. Rictor, an important component of mTORC2, contributes to glucose homeostasis in murine muscle tissue (Bentzinger et al., 2008). TORC2 C. elegans mutants show modulation of feeding and metabolism of different diets by affecting (Soukas et al., 2009). TORC2 is a mediator of proliferative and survival signals in cancer cells (Fang et al., 2012), and a study in mouse fibroblasts showed that mTORC2 regulates the TLR-mediated inflammatory response via FoxO1 (Brown et al., 2011). In additionof random permutations to calculate an empirical P-value for the observed SNP set statistic. In our analysis, we used a setmax of 5, a set-P of 0.01 and a set-r2 of 0.5. The SNP sets were defined as the 10-kb regions upstream and downstream of the genes in the mTOR pathway (Fig. 1). The analysis was performed separately for nonagenarians vs. controls and offspring vs. controls, including age (in offspring vs. controls only) and gender and their interaction as covariates.The text seems to be a scientific article discussing the association between gene expression and insulin-related phenotypes. Here is the processed text:

The study analysed simulated SNP sets in which the phenotype status of individuals was permuted. An empirical P-value for the SNP set was computed by calculating the number of times the test statistic of the simulated SNP sets exceeded that of the original SNP set. The parameters used were setP = 0.05, set-r2 = 0.5, set-max = 99 999, and mperm = 10 000. Bonferroni correction for the pathway analysis was not necessary as it contained just one test. When SNP sets were tested per gene (40 SNP sets), the significance level for P-values after Bonferroni correction for multiple testing was 0.00125.

Since the mTOR pathway has been implicated in insulin-related phenotypes, its effect on the expression of longevity-related genes was investigated. Blood samples were taken at baseline to determine non-fasted serum parameters using Hitachi Modular or Cobas Integra 800, both from Roche, Almere, the Netherlands. CVs of these measurements were all below 5%. Information on medical history was requested from participants' general practitioners. Differences in expression level between offspring and controls were assessed using linear regression with the same model but excluding known Type 2 diabetes patients. The association of glucose and insulin levels with expression levels of seven longevity-associated genes was also analysed using linear regression in controls only. To investigate the influence of glucose and insulin levels on the association with longevity of these seven genes, linear regression between offspring and controls was performed again, including one of these parameters as a covariate.

The candidate genes' expression level was again tested for association with familial longevity, but now adjusted for blood cell subtypes. The references section contains several scientific articles related to the study's topic. The authors thank all participants of the Leiden Longevity Study. The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2011) under grant agreement no. 259679. This study was supported by a grant from the Innovation-Oriented Research Program on Genomics (SenterNovem IGE05007), the Centre for Medical Systems Biology, the Netherlands Consortium for Healthy Ageing (Grant 050-060-810), all in the framework of the Netherlands Genomics Initiative, the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO), and by Unilever Colworth. David A. Gunn is employed by Unilever PLC and involved in the design, data collection and analysis as well as the decision to publish.And glucocorticoid-induced protein kinase (SGK). Biochem. J., Goeman JJ, Oosting J () Globaltest R package, version. Ref Type: Computer Program. Goeman JJ, van de Geer SA, de Kort F, van Houwelingen JC () A global test for groups of genes: testing association with a clinical outcome. Bioinformatics, Goeman JJ, Oosting J, Cleton-Jansen AM, Anninga JK, van Houwelingen HC () Testing association of a pathway with survival using gene expression data. Bioinformatics, Barzilai N, Gabriely I, Gabriely M, Iankowitz N, Sorkin JD (2001) Offspring of centenarians have a favorable lipid profile. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 49, 7679. Brown J, Wang H, Suttles J, Graves DT, Martin M (2011) Mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2) negatively regulates toll-like receptor 4-mediated Sarbassov DD, Guertin DA, Ali SM, Sabatini DM () Phosphorylation and regulation of Akt/PKB by the rictor-OR complex. Science, Schoenmaker M, de Craen AJ, de Meijer PH, Beekman M, Blauw GJ, Slagboom PE, Westendorp RG () Evidence of genetic enrichment for exceptional survival using a family approach: the Leiden Longevity Study. Eur. J. Hum. Genet., Sengupta S, Peterson TR, Sabatini DM () Regulation of the OR complex pathway by nutrients, growth factors and stress. Mol. Cell , Soukas AA, Kane EA, Carr CE, Melo JA, Ruvkun G () Rictor/TORC regulates fat metabolism, feeding, growth, and lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genes Dev., Spindler SR () Rapid and reversible induction of the longevity, anticancer and genomic effects of caloric restriction. Mech. Ageing Dev., Stanfel MN, Shamieh LS, Kaeberlein M, Kennedy BK () The TOR pathway comes of age. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Stat orp () Stata Statistical Software: Release College Station, TX: Stat orp LP. Strimpakos A, Saif MW, Syrigos KN () Pancreatic cancer: from molecular pathogenesis to targeted therapy. Cancer Metastasis Rev., Thedieck K, Polak P, Kim ML, Molle KD, Cohen A, Jeno P, Arrieumerlou C, Hall MN () PRAS and PRR-like protein are new OR interactors that regulate apoptosis. PL One , e Vellai T, Takacs-Vellai K, Zhang Y, Kovacs AL, Orosz L, Muller F () Genetics: influence of TOR kinase on lifespan in C. elegans. Nature , Westendorp RG, van Heemst D, Rozing MP, Frolich M, Mooijaart SP, Blauw GJ, Beekman M, Heijmans BT, de Craen AJ, Slagboom PE () Nonagenarian siblings and their offspring display lower risk of mortality and morbidity than sporadic nonagenarians: The Leiden Longevity Study. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc., Wijsman CA, Rozing MP, Streefland TC, le Cessie S, Mooijaart SP, Slagboom PE, Westendorp RG, Pijl H, van Heemst D (2011) Familial longevity is marked by enhanced insulin sensitivity. Aging Cell 10, 114121. Enhanced insulin sensitivity. Aging Cell 10, 114121. Yap TA, Garrett MD, Walton MI, Raynaud F, de Bono JS, Workman P (2008) Targeting the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway: progress, pitfalls, and promises. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 8, 393412.
Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of this article on the publisher's website.
Table S1 Analyzed samples: genetic variation.
S2 Measured SNPs in the mTOR pathway.
S3 Results of gene set analysis of the mTOR pathway gene SNP Table S4 Linear regression results of gene expression of offspring compared with controls, including adjustments for T-cell differentiation markers.
Table S5 Descriptives of prevalence of disease and metabolic syndrome-related parameters in offspring and controls (n = 658).
T, Takacs-Vellai K, Zhang Y, Kovacs AL, Orosz L, Muller F (2003) Genetics: influence of TOR kinase on lifespan