Blackwell Publishing, Ltd. introduced insulin/IGF-1 signaling and human longevity.

Introduction:
Diana van Heemst, Marian Beekman, Simon P. Mooijaart, Bastiaan T. Heijmans, Bernd W. Brandt, Bas J. Zwaan, P. Eline Slagboom, and Rudi G. J. Westendorp have found evidence that aging is hormonally regulated by an evolutionarily conserved insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS) pathway (reviewed in Tatar et al., 2003).

In the hermaphrodite Caenorhabditis elegans, mutations in components of the IIS pathway were first shown to affect dauer formation. In response to adverse conditions such as food limitation, juvenile C. elegans can enter a non-feeding, developmentally arrested, reproductively immature, stress-resistant, and long-lived dauer state. Upon dauer formation, metabolism shifts to the establishment and utilization of fat reserves. Induction of the dauer state allows the animal to postpone development and reproduction until environmental conditions have become more favorable.

Summary:
Evidence is accumulating that aging is hormonally regulated by an evolutionarily conserved insulin/IGF-1 signaling (IIS) pathway. Mutations in IIS components affect lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster, and mice. Most long-lived IIS mutants also show increased resistance to oxidative stress.

In D. melanogaster and mice, the long-lived phenotype of several IIS mutants is restricted to females. Here, we analyzed the relationship between IIS signaling, body height, and longevity in humans in a prospective follow-up study.

Based on the expected effects (increased or decreased signaling) of the selected variants in IIS pathway components (GHRHR, GH1, IGF1, INS, IRS1), we calculated composite IIS scores to estimate IIS pathway activity.

In addition, we analyzed the relative impact on lifespan and body size of the separate variants in multivariate models. In women, lower IIS scores are significantly associated with lower body height and improved old age survival. Multivariate analyses showed that these results were most pronounced for the GH1 SNP, IGF1 CA repeat, and IRS1 SNP.

In females, for variant allele carriers of the GH1 SNP, body height was 2 cm lower (P = 0.007), and mortality was 0.80-fold reduced (P = 0.019) when compared with wild-type allele carriers. Thus, in females, genetic variation causing reduced IIS activation is beneficial for old age survival. This effect was stronger for the GH1 SNP than for variation in the conserved IIS genes that were found to affect longevity in model organisms.

Key words: human, insulin/IGF-1 signaling, longevity,

More recently, subtle mutations in IIS components were found to affect reproduction, metabolism, stress response, and lifespan in adult C. elegans (reviewed by Kenyon, 2001). A reduction in the level of IIS increases the activity of DAF-16, a member of the family of forkhead transcription factors.

Changed DAF-16 activity results in a different transcriptional profile and thus coordinately affects different effector genes and pathways. The classes of genes regulated by DAF-16 include those implicated in the cellular stress response, antimicrobial defense, metabolism, and hormonal signaling (Murphy et al., 2003).

The link between reduced IIS signaling and longevity originally discovered in C. elegans was subsequently also observed in Drosophila melanogaster.

Mutants in the D. melanogaster insulin receptor InR (Tatar et al., 2001) and in the insulin receptor substrate CHICO (Clancy et al., 2001) are both long-lived. Strikingly, however, in both cases, the long-lived phenotype was only observed for females. In addition to being long-lived, these D. melanogaster females are small, obese, and infertile.

The IIS pathway has greatly increased in complexity during evolution, leading to different branches and tissue specificity. The IGF1 and INS genes probably derive from a common ancestor, which first evolved into IGF and INS, after which event the IGF gene further diverged into IGF1 and IGF2 (Patton et al., 1998).

GH control of IGF-1 arose relatively late in evolution within vertebrates. The different branches of the mammalian IIS pathway interact at several levels, for example by using the same receptor substrates, such as IRS1.

Data from mice indicate that the lifespan regulatory elements of the mammalian IIS pathway are not restricted to one particular component or to one. For instance, recent data from FIRKO mice, in which the insulin receptor was specificallymales for the SOD2 exon 16 SNP, UCP2 promoter SNP, or UCP2 45-bp insertion/deletion. The absence of an effect on mortality for these oxidative stress response polymorphisms is consistent with previous studies (Suh et al., 2008). 

To explain the observed sexual dimorphism in the association between reduced IIS activity and longevity, we must consider sex differences in GH/IGF-1 signaling. In mammals, GH/IGF-1 activity is known to differ between sexes, with irregularity being greater in females due to estrogen increasing the irregularity of GH release. Additionally, the growth spurt that occurs at puberty is sex hormone driven in both sexes. When interpreting the effects of GH/IGF-1 signaling on longevity, cumulative exposure to GH/IGF-1 over an individual's lifetime and the effect of GH/IGF-1 at different time points in an individual's life history should be considered. Increased cumulative exposure to GH/IGF-1 has adverse effects in mice and humans, such as reduced lifespan, insulin resistance, and increased risk of cancer. 

In conclusion, carriers of combinations of variants that result in decreased IIS signaling are associated with reduced body height and improved old age survival, with the effects on survival being confined to females. The most significant polymorphism analyzed was the GH1 SNP, as female carriers of this variant were significantly smaller and exhibited a significant benefit in old age survival. Sex differences in GH/IGF-1 signaling may explain the observed sexual dimorphism in the association between reduced IIS activity and longevity.For the polymorphisms affecting the oxidative stress response, we analyzed them as independent covariates in a left-censored Cox proportional hazards model (Table 6) for both males and females. However, we did not find any association between a composite oxidative stress response (OSR) score and relative mortality risk in the combined cohorts of the Leiden 85-plus Study. The estimates were 1.11 for women (P for linear trend = 0.14) and 1.03 for men (P for linear trend = 0.72) for each increase. 

However, reduced GH/IGF-1 signaling may have adverse effects, especially in old age, as increased induction of apoptosis is associated with growth factor withdrawal throughout adulthood. The relationship between IIS signaling and longevity in mammals is complex and controversial (Rincon et al., 2004). Here, we show in a prospective study of older people from the population that serum GH concentration and pulsatile GH secretion rates fall steadily, with an estimated 14% per decade in men, a phenomenon known as somatopause (Iranmanesh et al., 1991). The reduced GH secretion is believed to contribute to many age-related diseases, such as loss of muscle mass, increased adiposity, reduced bone mineral density, and a decline in cognition (reviewed in Bartke et al., 2003). In these parameters too, sex differences have been found. Premenopausal women are significantly better protected than men from the negative impact of increasing age on GH levels (reviewed in Giustina & Veldhuis, 1998). Our results suggest that in females but not in males, the beneficial effects of reduced cumulative exposure to GH/IGF-1 outweigh the possible detrimental effects of lower GH/IGF-1 levels at old age.

The strengths of this study are several-fold. First, the analyzed polymorphisms were selected based on known effects on gene expression. Second, the effects on longevity were detected in a prospective analysis, which contained a high number of events (deaths) during the time of follow-up. Third, these effects were detected despite the fact that gene-by-environment interactions are important and human studies are uncontrolled with respect to environmental exposure. 

A first weakness of the study is that the results have not been replicated in another cohort of elderly, as cohorts of similarly aged people are not readily available. A second weakness is that we cannot completely exclude the possibility that differences in birth cohorts have confounded our results. However, such problems are of greater importance in cross-sectional studies than in prospective studies, whereas allele frequencies were not statistically different between cohort 87 (birth cohorts 1883-1902) and cohort 97 (birth cohorts 1912-1914). A third drawback is related to our selection of analyzed polymorphisms based on published effects on gene expression. This approach implies that we may have missed other existing (but not yet published) functional polymorphisms and that therefore our analyses are not exhaustive.

Of the polymorphisms analyzed, the association with body height and longevity is most significant for the GH1 SNP (in female carriers), although a similar trend was observed for two of the other polymorphisms tested (the IGF1 CA repeat and the IRS1 SNP). This could be caused by differences in the effects of the genetic variants on gene expression or protein function or by differences in the impact of these effects. Because the IIS pathway is a hierarchical network, effects of variation in IIS components may depend on their position within the hierarchy. We speculate that effects of variation in regulatory components that arose relatively late in evolution, such as GH1, may be of greater importance for human lifespan than variation in core components.

In conclusion, we present evidence that reduced IIS activity is associated with longevity in females but not in males. Of the analyzed polymorphisms, results were most pronounced for the GH1 SNP. The detected associations with longevity are in line with corresponding associations with body height, and the observed sex difference can be explained by biologically determined sex differences in the regulation of the GH/IGF-1 axis.

One of the mechanisms postulated for the life-extending effect of reduced signaling via the GH/IGF-1 axis is increased resistance to oxidative stress. In mice, administration of GH or IGF-1 in vitro as well as in vivo significantly suppresses enzymes implicated in the antioxidative stress response (Brown-Borg & Rakoczy, 2003). We, therefore, looked at the effect of polymorphisms in genes implicated in the antioxidative stress response on longevity. One mechanism by which forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a (also known as FKHR-L1), the closest mammalian homologue of C. elegans DAF-16, protects quiescent cells from oxidative stress is increasing the expression of manganese superoxide dismutase (SOD2) (the homozygous wild-type allele carriers, the latter being the reference group.

Table 2: Polymorphisms from the oxidative stress response were selected based on their previously described functionality and expected effect on the oxidative stress response pathway.

Acknowledgments:

We are grateful to J. J. Houwing-Duistermaat for the use of multivariate analysis. We thank all other members of the Long Life study group: A. Ayrinhac, E. A. Baldal, G. J. D. I. Boomsma, P. M. Brakefield, R. Bijlsma, J. C. van Ingen, D. L. Knook, I. Meulenbelt, P. H. E. M. de Meijer, and J. L. P. W. G. M. van de Zande.

We also thank C. de M. van Schie and M. van Kersbergen-van Oostrom for their assistance.

We are grateful to Gerrit van der Steege and Bruinenberg for the use of their ABI7900 Taqman equipment in Groningen.

This work was funded by an IOP (Innovative Research) grant from the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs (grant number IGE01014).

To test for combined effects of the selected polymorphisms, a composite (sub)pathway score was calculated for each participant by assigning a score of +1 for carriership of a variant causing increased signaling and a score of 1 for carriership of each variant causing decreased signaling.

Alternatively, the polymorphisms belonging to the same (sub)pathway (IIS pathway or oxidative stress response) were tested simultaneously as independent covariates in the above-mentioned models.

We used multivariate analyses to adjust for the effects of other functional variants from the same pathway.

SPSS and STATA were used for the statistical analyses, and Thesias was used for the calculation of linkage disequilibrium between the two polymorphisms in IGF1 and the two polymorphisms in UCP2.

References:

Ahluwalia A, Clodfelter KH, Waxman DJ (2000) Sexual dimorphism of rat liver gene expression: regulatory role of growth hormone by deoxyribonucleic acid microarray analysis. Mol. Endocrinol., 14(6): 1075-1087.

Arends N, Johnston L, Hokken-Koelega A, van Duijn C, de Ridder M, Savage M, Clark A (1999) Polymorphism in the IGF-I gene: clinical relevance for short children born small for gestational age (SGA). J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 84(10): 3591-3598.

Bartke A, Chandrashekar V, Dominici F, Turyn D, Kinney B, Steger R, Kopchick JJ (2003) Insulin-like growth factor (IGF-) and aging: controversies and new insights. Biogerontology, 4(1): 1-8.

Bennett ST, Todd JA (1996) Human type diabetes and the insulin gene: principles of mapping polygenes. Annu. Rev. Genet., 30: 343-370.

Genotyping:

DNA was available for 1245 subjects of the combined cohorts of the Leiden 85-plus Study.

The genotypes for the five SNPs were determined with Taqman assays (Applied Biosystems, Nieuwerkerk, The Netherlands).

Assay by Design was used as recommended except for the following modifications:

A qPCR core kit was used (Eurogentec, Maastricht, The Netherlands) with one-third of the recommended amount of assay mix.

PCRs were performed on an ABI9700, and post-PCR fluorescence was measured on an ABI7900.

Reduced IIS and human longevity, D. van Heemst et al., growth hormone (GH) secretory bursts and the half-life of GH in healthy men. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 86(1): 292-299.

Kenyon C (2010) A conserved regulatory system for aging. Cell, 120(4): 437-448.

Kops GJ, Dansen TB, Polderman PE, Saarloos I, Wirtz KW, Coffer PJ, Huang TT, Bos JL, Medema RH, Burgering BM (2002) Forkhead transcription factor FOXO alpha protects quiescent cells from oxidative stress. Nature, 419(6904): 316-321.

Kurtzke JF (1983) On estimating survival; a tale of two censors. J. Clin. Epidemiol., 36(8): 771-778.

MigliSorry, there seems to be an error in the input. Could you please provide the full text for me to proofread and improve?