Human longevity and common variations in the LMNA gene: a meta-analysis.

Karen N. Conneely, Brian C. Capell, Michael R. Erdos, Paola Sebastiani, Nadia Solovieff, Amy J. Swift, Clinton T. Baldwin, Temuri Budagov, Nir Barzilai, Gil Atzmon, Annibale A. Puca, Thomas T. Perls, Bard J. Geesaman, Michael Boehnke and Francis S. Collins.

Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA , USA.

Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD , USA.

Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA , USA.

New England Centenarian Study, Geriatrics Section, Department of Medicine, Boston Medical Center and Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA , USA.

Department of Medicine and Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY , USA.

Istituto Ricovero Cura Carattere Scientifico Multimedica, Milano, Italy Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Segrate, Italy.

Elixir Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA , USA.

Department of Biostatistics and Center for Statistical Genetics.

Introduction

Single gene mutations have been shown to extend the lifespan of worms, yeast and mice (Kenyon 2005). Similarly twin studies have shown that 25-30% of the variance in human lifespan can be attributed to genetic differences (Herskind et al., 1996; Ljungquist et al., 1998; Skytthe et al., 2003). With the completion of the International HapMap Project power to detect common variants for common and complex diseases has increased (Manolio et al., 2008) and the search for genetic contributors to human aging and lifespan has been accelerated. The results thus far have been somewhat discouraging: only APOE and FOXO3A have been consistently associated with longevity across populations in candidate gene studies (Christensen et al., 2006; Novelli et al., 2008). Even strong candidates such as the WRN gene associated with the premature aging syndrome, Werner syndrome (Castro et al., 2000), have displayed inconsistent results (Christensen et al., 2006). Similarly, all longevity-associated SNPs reaching genome-wide significance in two recently published genome-wide association studies were associated with the APOE gene (Deelen et al., 2011; Nebel et al., 2011). However, because variants with subtler associations with longevity will not be detectable at genome-wide significance levels with conventional sample sizes, candidate gene studies remain a useful approach.

Summary

A mutation in the LMNA gene is responsible for the most dramatic form of premature aging, Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS). Several recent studies have suggested that protein products of this gene might have a role in normal physiological cellular senescence. To explore further LMNA's possible role in normal aging, we genotyped 16 SNPs over a span of 75.4 kb of the LMNA gene on a sample of long-lived individuals (LLI) (US Caucasians with age > 95 years, N = 873) and genetically matched younger controls (N = 443). We tested all common nonredundant haplotypes (frequency > 0.05) based on subgroups of these 16 SNPs for association with longevity. The most significant haplotype, based on four SNPs, remained significant after adjustment for multiple testing (OR=1.56, P=2.5 x 10^-5, multiple-testing-adjusted P=0.0045). To attempt to replicate these results, we genotyped 3448 subjects from four independent samples of LLI and control subjects from (i) the New England Centenarian Study (NECS) (N=738), (ii) the Southern Italian Centenarian Study (SICS) (N=905), (iii) France (N=1103) and (iv) the Einstein Ashkenazi Longevity Study (N=702). We replicated the association with the most significant haplotype from our initial analysis in the NECS sample (OR=1.60, P=0.0023), but not in the other three samples (P>0.15). In a meta-analysis combining all five samples, the best haplotype remained significantly associated with longevity after adjustment for multiple testing.

One major candidate gene for longevity that has not yet been explored is LMNA. Defects in the LMNA gene, which encodes the nuclear envelope proteins lamin A and lamin C, have been associated with at least 13 diseases, including Hutchinson-Ganalysis of LMNA SNPs in four populations of long-lived individuals and controls. The haplotype GTCT, comprised of SNPs 6, 7, 13, and 15, was the most significant haplotype associated with longevity in a meta-analysis across all samples. The association remained significant after adjustment for multiple testing. The association was not substantially affected by inclusion of principal components of ancestry informative markers as covariates in the analysis, suggesting that the observed haplotype association is not driven by population stratification. The association with GTCT was observed in two of the three US samples, but not in the European samples, suggesting possible regional differences in environmental exposures that interact with aging-related genes to affect longevity. Replication of genetic associations for longevity across diverse populations has been difficult in the literature, and reasons for lack of replication include regional differences in environmental exposures and lack of gender stratification in analyses.the case-control status within each of the five samples, (ii) computing trend test statistics for all haplotypes and SNPs in the permuted Stage 1 sample, (iii) selecting the most significant 6-SNP haplotype from the permuted Stage 1 analysis for follow-up, (iv) performing trend tests of association for all six SNPs and haplotypes composed of 26 SNP combinations of these six SNPs in the four permuted Stage 2 samples, and (v) computing meta-analysis statistics for all haplotypes and SNPs tested on all five permuted samples, recording the value of the most significant meta-analysis test statistic. We performed 10,000 permutations and computed the empirical P-value as the proportion of permutations in which the best statistic from the permutation was greater in magnitude than the best statistic from the original data analysis.

We used MaCH 1.0 software to infer 16-SNP haplotypes for all individuals in Stage 1 and 6-SNP haplotypes for all individuals in Stage 2. For individuals with missing genotypes, we inferred the most likely genotype based on haplotype frequencies within the sample. We imputed genotypes for SNP rs1468772 that was not genotyped in the French sample using MaCH and phased haplotype information from the HapMap CEU sample.

We performed association tests in all five samples and combined them in a meta-analysis using R. We performed all SNP and haplotype association tests as Cochran-Armitage tests for a linear trend between the number of copies of a reference allele (0, 1, or 2) and the likelihood that an individual belongs to the case or control group. We first tested each SNP or haplotype for association with centenarian status. We computed meta-analysis statistics for all followed-up SNPs and haplotypes as the weighted sum of z-statistics from the trend tests. The weights for sample i were defined as sqrt(n_i). 

We also genotyped AIMs from a published panel specific to European genetic substructure for the Stage 1 sample, and computed principal components to adjust for potential population stratification. We included the top principal components as covariates in the original analysis. Principal components based on genotypes from the 370K Illumina SNP chip were available for a subset of the NECS sample, and we used EIGENSTRAT to compute the principal components and include them as covariates in the original analysis.

Our initial haplotype association was replicated in one of four follow-up samples, and the association was sufficiently strong in those two samples to remain significant when combined in a meta-analysis of all five. The meta-analysis results complement a growing body of experimental evidence suggesting a potential role for LMNA and progerin in aspects of normal aging. However, given the incomplete replication observed, further work is needed to validate and interpret the results reported here. One of the four SNPs in our reported haplotype, rs4641, is a coding SNP for which allele-specific expression has been demonstrated, with 2.3-fold greater expression for transcripts with the C allele, which is part of the GTCT haplotype associated with greater longevity in our meta-analysis. Another SNP in our reported haplotype, rs915179, was associated with longevity in a recent genome-wide association study. Additional association studies of LMNA variants in independent samples and additional experiments focusing on functional consequences of the associated variants would be particularly valuable in establishing and elucidating the role of LMNA in the normal aging process.

If our initial haplotype association had not been replicated in all four follow-up samples, it would have been difficult to argue against the possibility of a false positive. However, the probability of observing a second false positive of similar strength is low (<0.005). Other possible explanations for incomplete replication include undetected population structure, use of underpowered replication samples, and heterogeneity between samples. However, adjustment for potential population stratification via principal components only modestly diminished the associations reported here. Similarly, differential power based on sample size differences does not appear to explain the incomplete replication as the NECS sample was arguably the least well-powered due to small sample size and skewed case-control ratio. Heterogeneity between samples can occur for a variety of reasons, such as differential ascertainment of cases or between-sample differences in environmental exposures. One potential source of heterogeneity is differential ascertainment of LLI, as the minimum age for inclusion varied by meta-analysis test statistic.In the two-stage analysis, we accounted for case-control status and recomputed the test statistics for all SNPs and haplotypes. After 10,000 permutations, we computed adjusted P-values to reflect the probability of each result occurring by chance alone. To determine if our most extreme P-value was significantly different from what we would expect if there was no true association, we calculated an empirical P-value as the proportion of permutations in which a more extreme result was observed in any of the SNPs or haplotypes analyzed. To establish whether a significant excess of haplotypes with P < a was observed for a given a-level, we computed empirical P-values as the proportion of permutations in which we observed as many haplotypes with P < a as in our original data.

Acknowledgments: This work has been supported by grants from Glenn Award for Research in Biological Mechanisms of Aging (N.B.), NIH PO1 AG027734 (N.B.), NIHNIA Longevity Consortium U19 AG023122 (G.A., T.P), NIHNIA R56 AG027216 (C.B.), and NIHNHLBI R01 HL87681-01 (N.S.). We thank Drs. Gilles Thomas, Helene Blanche, and Valerie Morel for genotyping the French samples analyzed in this study and Narisu Narisu for providing technical assistance with the genotyping of the Stage 1 samples.

To account for multiple testing in the two-stage analysis, we performed permutation tests in R to obtain an empirical P-value for the best observed Malovini A, Illario M, Iaccarino G, Villa F, Ferrario A, Roncarati R, Anselmi CV, Novelli V, Cipolletta E, Leggiero E, Orro A, Rusciano MR, Milanesi L, Maione AS, Condorelli G, Bellazzi R, Puca AA (2011) Association study on long-living individuals from Southern Italy identifies rs10491334 in the CAMKIV gene that regulates survival proteins.

References: Anselmi CV, Malovini A, Roncarati R, Novelli V, Villa F, Condorelli G, Bellazzi R, Puca AA (2011) Association of the FOXO A locus with extreme longevity in a southern Italian centenarian study. Rejuvenation Res., Armitage P (1955) Tests for linear trends in proportions and frequencies. Biometrics, Cao K, Capell BC, Erdos MR, Djabali K, Collins FS (2007) A lamin A protein isoform overexpressed in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome interferes with mitosis in progeria and normal cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, Cao K, Blair CD, Faddah DA, Kieckhaefer JE, Olive M, Erdos MR, Nabel EG, Collins FS (2011) Progerin and telomere dysfunction collaborate to trigger cellular senescence in normal human fibroblasts. J. Clin. Invest., Capell BC, Collins FS (2006) Human laminopathies: nuclei gone genetically awry. Nat. Rev. Genet., Capell BC, Collins FS, Nabel EG (2006) Mechanisms of cardiovascular disease in accelerated aging syndromes. Circ. Res., Castro E, Edland SD, Lee L, Ogburn CE, Deeb SS, Brown G, Panduro A, Riestra R, Tilvis R, Louhija J, Penttinen R, Erkkola R, Wang L, Martin GM, Oshima J (2000) Polymorphisms at the Werner locus: II. LeuPhe, CysArg, longevity, and atherosclerosis. Am. J. Med. Genet., Christensen K, Johnson TE, Vaupel JW (2006) The French paradox persists: understanding mortality in light of the role of wine and alcohol. BMJ, Malovini A, Illario M, Iaccarino G, Villa F, Ferrario A, Roncarati R, Anselmi CV, Novelli V, Cipolletta E, Leggiero E, Orro A, Rusciano MR, Milanesi L, Maione AS, Condorelli G, Bellazzi R, Puca AA (2011) Association study on long-living individuals from Southern Italy identifies rs10491334 in the CAMKIV gene that regulates survival proteins. Rejuvenation Res., Manolio TA, Brooks LD, Collins FS (2008) A Hap harvest of insights into the genetics of common disease. J. Clin. Invest., McCarthy MI, Abecasis GR, Cardon LR, Goldstein DB, Little J, Ioannidis JP, Hirschhorn JN (Quest for Genetic Determinants of Human Longevity: Challenges and Insights. Nat. Rev. Genet., Cochran WG () Some methods for strengthening the common v tests. Biometrics, Deelen J, Beekman M, Uh HW, Helmer Q, Kuningas M, Christiansen L, Kremer D, van der Breggen R, Suchiman HE, Lakenberg N, van den Akker EB, Pastor WM, Tiemeier H, van Heemst D, de Craen AJ, Rivadeneira F, de Geus EJ, Perola M, van der Ouderaa FJ, Gunn DA, Boomsma DI, Uitterlinden AG, Christensen K, van Duijn CM, Heijmans BT, Houwing-Duistermaat JJ, Westendorp RG, Slagboom PE () Genome-wide association study identifies a single major locus contributing to survival into old age; the APOE locus revisited. Aging Cell , Flachsbart F, Caliebe A, Kleindorp R, Blanche H, von Eller-Eberstein H, Nikolaus S, Schreiber S, Nebel A () Association of FOXO A variation with human longevity confirmed in German centenarians. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA , Geesaman BJ, Benson E, Brewster SJ, Kunkel LM, Blanche H, Thomas G, Perls TT, Daly MJ, Puca AA () Haplotype-based identification of a microsomal transfer protein marker associated with the human lifespan. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA , Gruenbaum Y, Margalit A, Goldman RD, Shumaker DK, Wilson KL () The nuclear lamina comes of age. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., Herskind AM,MueM,HolmNV,SorensenTI,HarvaldB,VaupelJW()Theheritabilityofhumanlongevity:apopulation-based study of Danish twin pairs born. Hum. Genet., International Hap Consortium () A haplotype map of the human genome. Nature, Kenyon C () The plasticity of aging: insights from long-lived mutants. Cell, Kuningas M, Magi R, Westendorp RG, Slagboom PE, Remm M, van Heemst D () Haplotypes in the human Foxo a and Foxo a genes; impact on disease and mortality at old age. Eur. J. Hum. Genet., Li Y, Wang WJ, Cao H, Lu J, Wu C, Hu FY, Guo J, Zhao L, Yang F, Zhang YX, Li W, Zheng GY, Cui H, Chen X, Zhu Z, He H, Dong B, Mo X, Zeng Y, Tian XL () Genetic association of FOXO A and FOXO A with longevity trait in Han Chinese populations. Hum. Mol. Genet., Li Y, Willer CJ, Ding J, Scheet P, Abecasis GR () MH: using sequence and genotype data to estimate haplotypes and unobserved genotypes. Genet. Epidemiol., Ljungquist B, Berg S, Lanke J,MlearnGE,PedersenNL()Theeffectofgeneticfactorsforlongevity:acomparisonofidenticalandfraternal twins in the Swedish Twin Registry. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci., de Lorgeril M,RenaudS,MamelleN,SalenP,MartinJL,MonjaudI,GuidolletJ,TouboulP,DelayeJ()Mediterranean alpha-linolenic acid-rich diet in secondary prevention of coronary heart disease. Lancet, Supporting Information redundant haplotypes and six SNPs in the NECS sample. As a service to our authors and readers, this journal provides supporting information supplied by the authors. Such materials are peer-reviewed and may be reorganized for online delivery, but are not copy-edited or typeset. Technical support issues arising from supporting information (other than missing files) should be addressed to supporting information may be found in the online version of this article: S Experimental procedures: sample collection and S Quantile plot of P-values from association tests of non-haplotypes and SNPs in the Stage sample.