HRAS1 and LASS1, along with APOE, are linked to human longevity and healthy aging. The study involved haplotype analysis in three candidate genes, which were tested for association with exceptional longevity. The results revealed that an HRAS1 haplotype enhanced the effect of an APOE haplotype on exceptional survival, and a LASS1 haplotype further augmented its magnitude. These findings were replicated in a second population. Additionally, the study developed a healthy aging profile using a deficit accumulation index that showed that this combination of gene variants is associated with healthy aging. The variation in LASS1 is functional and causes enhanced expression of the gene, contributing to healthy aging and greater survival in the tenth decade of life. Therefore, rare gene variants are not necessary to explain complex traits such as aging; instead, rare congruence of common gene variants readily fulfills this role. The interaction between the three genes suggests new models for cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying exceptional survival and healthy aging that involve lipotoxicity. 

The study revealed that APOE e4 allele is a risk factor for early mortality, while the alleles e2 and e3 are enriched in exceptionally old individuals in some studies. Apolipoprotein E (APOE) is important in chylomicron and very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) metabolism. Thus, it is one of the factors responsible for maintaining circulating lipid homeostasis. This balance can break down with age and is clearly disrupted in some individuals resulting in an increase in the risk for cardiovascular disease and other disorders. The rise in circulating cholesterol and triglycerides results in vascular damage and can be a cause of lipotoxicity, a potential trigger of insulin resistance and diabetes. This lipotoxicity may trigger responses that are mediated by HRAS1, a small G-protein involved in signal transduction. Furthermore, some of the pathways that are induced are modulated by ceramide, a product of the ceramide synthase LASS1. Ceramide synthase responds to growth and stress signals via Tor complex TORC2 and calcineurin, respectively. Lipotoxicity stimulates ceramide synthesis, and the resulting ceramide can signal apoptosis, resulting in the removal of damaged cells. It can also facilitate the transfer of cholesterol from cells to high-density lipoprotein (HDL). Therefore, the study postulates that the HRAS1 and LASS1 genes interact genetically with the APOE gene to reduce age-related increase in lipotoxic events, and that a combination of variants or haplotypes in these three genes is associated with exceptional survival. 

The study initiated a genetic analysis of exceptional longevity in the Georgia and Louisiana populations. The populations were admixed with the two major strata being of European and African origin. To address this problem, the study stratified each population by ethnic affiliation using an identical-by-descent (IBD) genetic system. The subjects in each population were placed into two major groups of African and European origin. Together, these two groups constituted 81% and 83% of subjects of 2059 years old and 72% and 77% of centenarians and nonagenarians in the Georgia and Louisiana samples, respectively. The ability to stratify was markedly enhanced by the Alu system used here, which can trace genealogy within the primate lineage. The mean correct prediction rates with the 100 above is associated with longevity, we genotyped the Georgia sample at the three relevant genomic regions. None of the HRAS1 or LASS1 variants showed an association with longevity.15 SNPs examined showed significance for departure from Hardy-Weinberg proportions in either the African or European-origin populations in Georgia. The same was found separately for the Louisiana population. We searched for combinations of haplotypes in the three genes (15 SNPs) in the Georgia population present at 0.01 or greater frequency, using expectation maximization. We then tested them for association with exceptional longevity (Table S4). Such associations were detected in the sub-population of European origin in Georgia, stratified with an assignment probability of 0.9 (Table 1), but not in the subpopulation of African origin. They involve the e3 containing APOE.

Table 1 shows the association of haplotypes with exceptional longevity and healthy aging. The European subpopulations (0.9 assignment probability) were examined. The haplotypes are ATTTC and CGCGCGT for APOE and HRAS1, respectively. Healthy and unhealthy were classified as described in Experimental procedures. OR, odds ratio; CI, 95% confidence interval.

Table 2 indicates haplotype frequencies in the general population. A structure assignment probability of 0.8 was used for this analysis to provide a conservative evaluation of any differences. The 20- to 59-year-old age groups were used here as representative of the general population. APOE (ATTTC) and HRAS1 (CGCGCGT) haplotypes are shown.

To determine whether these associations are present in the Louisiana population, we carried out the same analyses independently. The results obtained in the Georgia sample replicated in the Louisiana sample (Table 1). The same haplotype combinations were associated with exceptional longevity in the subpopulation of European origin in Louisiana, stratified with an assignment probability of 0.9, and no significant association was found in the African-origin subpopulation. The odds ratios were 2.93 and 2.97 for the APOE, HRAS1, and LASS1 (CCT) or (CGT) haplotype combinations, respectively. The lower odds ratio of the LASS1 (CCT)-containing haplotype combination in the Louisiana population is likely due to the greater demographic selection for centenarians than for nonagenarians in the Georgia and Louisiana samples, respectively, but this does not appear to apply to the LASS1 (CGT).

An analysis of the frequency of the haplotypes in the individual genes supports the notion that there is an intrinsic difference between the European and African subpopulations in both Georgia and Louisiana (Table 2). The major difference is in the APOE haplotype frequency, with a smaller difference in LASS1. The European populations in Georgia and Louisiana also differ, as an examination of the haplotype blocks in the three genes suggests (Fig. S1).

The lack of an association with longevity in the African-American subpopulation from both Georgia and Louisiana could be attributed to the relatively lower numbers of subjects from this group. However, it is likely that this may be an intrinsic difference in the subpopulation. An analysis of the frequency of the haplotypes in the individual genes supports this notion.

To ascertain the potential role of the three-gene interaction in promoting exceptional survival, we examined the differences in various age groups' frequency of two haplotype combinations identified above in the European subpopulation. The results are shown for combinations containing LASS1 (CCT) and (CGT) in Table 1.

The association with exceptional survival in female centenarians was found solely for combined haplotypes of the three genes that included LASS1 (CCT), showing an odds ratio of 12.52. For male centenarians, it was instead the LASS1 (CGT) haplotype with an odds ratio of 12.40.

Consistent with the increase in haplotype frequencies with age, the APOE haplotype is associated with exceptional survival in the European-origin subpopulations from both Georgia and Louisiana, with odds ratios of 1.53 (CI = 1.08-2.17; Exact P = 2.12 x 10^-2; adjusted P = 2.12 x 10^-2) and 1.37 (CI = 1.02-1.83; Exact P = 4.37 x 10^-2; adjusted P = 4.37 x 10^-2), respectively. The APOEHRAS1 haplotype combination is also associated with longevity in both of these subpopulations, with odds ratios of 2.83 (CI = 1.88-4.26; Exact P = 5.68 x 10^-7; adjusted P = 1.14 x 10^-6) and 1.89 (CI = 1.35-2.65; ExactCombination containing the LASS1 (CGT) haplotype for the oldest age group. These positive associations with longevity indicate that these are longevity haplotypes. 

Gene combination associated with healthy aging

We next examined whether the genetic combination that contributes to exceptional longevity is also associated with healthy aging. Healthy aging is a concept that is difficult to define adequately. We elected to quantify healthy aging using the frequency of self-reported deficits (Rockwood & Mitnitski, 2007) in the Louisiana nonagenarians (Table S6). For this purpose, we surveyed subjects for the presence of 42 medical conditions or functional limitations and summed them for each nonagenarian. We then partitioned the subjects into tertiles based on the number of deficits reported; tertile 1 had the fewest deficits, while tertile 3 had the greatest number of deficits. A Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was performed for each of the tertiles (Fig. 3). Examining the entire sample of nonagenarians from Louisiana, the survival curves are significantly different (Wilcoxon v2 = 20.06, P < 0.0001).

We then determined the frequencies of the APOE (ATTTC) haplotype and its combination with HRAS1 (CGCGCGT) from the three-gene haplotype combination in the various age groups. Figure 2 shows that in both cases, there is a monotonic increase with age. None of the other haplotypes in the individual genes or haplotype combinations changed in frequency with age. The patterns seen indicate that HRAS1 has a synergistic (epistatic) effect with APOE, and this effect is further enhanced.

Fig. 3 Survival of nonagenarians as a function of their healthy aging profile. Kaplan-Meier survival of all nonagenarians in the Louisiana sample is plotted after partitioning individuals into tertiles of deficit accumulation. Deficit count increases from tertile 1. Mortality was assessed on follow-up after enrollment. Censoring is indicated by the symbols.

We then searched for genetic associations with healthy aging by examining the haplotypes in the three genes in the tertile with the fewest deficits vs. that with the most (Table 1). The results indicate that the combination of the same haplotypes in the three genes is associated with healthy aging but only for the combination including LASS1 (CGT). The OR for this association was 15.48 for the European subpopulation in Louisiana.

Functional impact of gene variants

The marked difference in the effects of the two LASS1 haplotypes suggests that they could have functional consequences. Variants in the APOE promoter at -491 and -219 are known to affect the expression of this gene at the transcription level (Artiga et al., 1998a,b). The combination we have found in the haplotype associated with exceptional survival elicits a moderate level of expression, approximately half of maximal. Because LASS1 only has an effect when a combination of haplotypes in APOE and HRAS1 is present, and this effect differs depending on the particular LASS1 haplotype, we examined the variants in the LASS1 gene for their potential role in transcription of the gene, using a luciferase reporter assay. The results indicate that compared to the AGC haplotype, the CCT- and CGT-containing promoters were 48% and 29% more active, respectively (Fig. 4). Thus, the variation observed in our study appears to be functional in determining mRNA expression levels. Perhaps, more moderate expression of LASS1 in males promotes healthier aging. It is noteworthy that varying expression of the LASS1 homolog in yeast, LAG1, affects the observed life extension.

Fig. 4 Impact of polymorphisms in LASS1 on gene expression. A luciferase reporter assay was used for determining the promoter activity in transfected HeLa cells. Error bars denote SEM for six independent experiments with at least six replicates for each of the four promoter constructs shown. The LASS1 promoter variants CCT and CGT associated with exceptional longevity were compared to an AGC variant. The control is a reporter lacking inserted promoter sequences.

Discussion

We have found a combination of variants in three genes that is associated not only with exceptional longevity but also with healthy aging. This is a novel finding. An association of HRAS1 with longevity was found before, and an interaction with the mitochondrial genome was demonstrated (Bonafe et al., 2002). A compensatory effect in late life of variants in one gene for the deleterious effects of variants in a second gene has also been described (Bergman et al., 2007). The combined effect described here involves three genes and extends the association to old age. Genetic interactions play an important role in complex traits, but they cansubjects. The Georgia sample (N = 650) was recruited from 44 counties in Northern Georgia through voters registration files, surveys of nursing homes and personal care homes in the catchment areas, and random digit dialing for younger subjects. The Louisiana sample (N = 869) was recruited from eight parishes within a 40-mile radius of Baton Rouge through the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services enrollment database for subjects 65 and older and voters registration files for younger individuals. Age of subjects was verified using demographic questionnaires and documentary evidence, and mortality data were collected using Social Security Death Index search. Subjects provided informed consent according to protocols approved by the respective institutional review boards. The demographic characteristics of the samples are tabulated (Table S7).

Small subsets of samples from Georgia and Louisiana were first independently genotyped to identify all detectable variation in the selected genomic regions. Only polymorphisms present at a frequency of over 0.09 were chosen for subsequent analysis in all samples. The haplotypes in the three genes are all present at high frequency in the European subpopulation in both Georgia and Louisiana.

The Alu sequences were amplified by PCR using locus-specific primers, and the PCR fragments were separated by agarose gel electrophoresis. The primers and methods used have been described previously (Bamshad et al., 2003; Watkins et al., 2003; et al., 2005). Subjects were classified as one or the other of possible homozygotes based on the presence of a particular sequence at a given locus or as heterozygotes. The Alu types thus obtained were analyzed to assign ethnicity using Structure (Pritchard et al., 2000). For this purpose, the same Alu genotypes from 715 independent DNA samples of subjects from around the world were used (Bamshad et al., 2003; Watkins et al., 2003; Ray et al., 2005). These spanned the geographic regions of Europe, Africa, Asia, India, and included sampling of individuals from many nations in each region (31 total). Subjects were then assigned populations of origin corresponding to these geographic regions using an assignment probability of 0.9. This provided sufficient power (> 0.95) to detect associations with exceptional longevity (Dai et al., 2007).

Genomic regions of interest were then amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using specific primers for each gene. Amplicons were verified by agarose gel electrophoresis, and cleaned DNA was subjected to cycle-sequencing using the Big-Dye Terminator Reagent version 3.1 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and the same primers, and the 3130xl DNA sequencing system (Applied Biosystems). Identification of alleles was aided by the SNP detection and base-calling software SEQSCAPE v2.5 (Applied Biosystems). To minimize errors, both strands of DNA were sequenced twice independently. The genotyped loci included SNP: rs449647, rs769446, rs405509, rs429358, rs7412, rs8176330, rs8176331, rs8176332, rs8176333, rs8176334, rs8176335, rs12628, rs60774903, and rs3746263.

Haplotype blocks for the three genes were examined using Haploview. The standard color scheme is used for DLOD values: bright red (D = 1, LOD ≥ 2); blue (D = 1, LOD < 2); shades of pink/red (D < 1, LOD ≥ 2); white (D < 1, LOD < 2). The numbers shown inside the boxes are D values ≥ 100 (empty boxes represent the D value of 1). Haplotype blocks are defined based on confidence bounds on D. If the one-sided upper 95% confidence bound on D lies between 0.7 and 0.98, the SNP pairs involved are considered to be in strong LD (Gabriel et al., 2002). Haploview was also used to examine the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. None of the 15 SNPs examined in this study showed significance for departure from Hardy-Weinberg proportions in the Georgia and Louisiana samples stratified by Structure at a 0.9 assignment probability. Haploview is available at: http://www.broad.mit.edu/mpg/haploview.

Some of the Louisiana samples were genotyped using the SNPlex technology (Applied Biosystems), which is based on the oligonucleotide ligation assay combined with multiplex PCR amplification. Primers were designed according to the SNPlex Design Pipeline for the following SNPs: rs449647, rs769446, rs405509, rs8176330, andSubjects, respectively. Seven hundred and fifteen subjects of known geographic ancestry (European, African, Asian, or Indian) were used as a reference. For each individual, Structure 2.2 estimates the proportion of ancestry from each of four populations. We used a burn-in of 15,000 iterations and ran 20,000 replications. Three replicate runs were performed on each dataset. The largest proportion values in each run were used to calculate the average ancestry proportion for each individual. Individuals were assigned to a specific geographic origin if the average was larger than a predetermined assignment probability (0.9 in this study) or considered admixed if the average was less. All haplotype analyses were performed on samples stratified for ethnic affiliation, as described here.

Deficit Index: Following previously published reports (Kulminski et al., 2008; Searle et al., 2008), our deficit index was derived as the unweighted count of the number of deficits divided by the total number of possible deficits for an individual. The self-reported medical history questionnaire was administered to all study participants, and its components were used to construct the deficit index. This was supplemented with items from an activities of daily living (ADL) questionnaire. Responses were grouped to create broader categories where similar ailments were defined more than once. After applying the above criteria, 42 deficits were included in the compilation of the index.

Linkage disequilibrium approaches to the analysis of gene-gene interactions have been proposed (Zhao et al., 2006), and the modeling of gene-gene interactions using association analysis of non-contiguous haplotypes has been implemented (Woo et al., 2006). We took a similar approach. The haplotype frequencies for the combination of SNP in APOE, HRAS1, and LASS1 were estimated by an Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm implemented in Arlequin (Excoffier et al., 2005). The SD was determined by the parametric bootstrap procedure in Arlequin (100 bootstraps). Those haplotype combinations present at a frequency of 0.01 or greater in the 20- to 59-year-old group in Georgia and in Louisiana were analyzed further. This cutoff was taken based on the considerations from comparison of statistical and molecular haplotyping for sample sizes as small as 17 (Tishkoff et al., 2000). The frequency estimates in case and control groups were used to generate 2 x 2 contingency tables to test significance of associations of the respective haplotype combinations with exceptional longevity. Fisher's exact test was used to assess significance. The sequential Dunn-Sidak procedure was used to adjust the exact P-values for multiple comparisons of haplotype combinations. The adjustment included seven such combinations independently identified in the Georgia and Louisiana samples in the subpopulations of European origin (Table S4). In the African-origin subpopulations, there were seven and three such combinations in these samples, respectively. A stringent criterion of adjusted P < 0.01 (two-sided) was used to identify the potentially interacting combinations.

Statistical analysis: There is substantial evidence supporting the hypothesis of association with exceptional longevity of variants in the three candidate genes chosen here for analysis. This information is presented in this paper. APOE has been replicated as a longevity-determining gene in numerous studies (Christensen et al., 2006). This gene anchors the interaction described in this report (Fig. 5). The hypothesis we test is related to the role of the apolipoprotein APOE in lipid and lipoprotein metabolism. The BioSystems Database (NCBI) lists 228 genes under the entry Metabolism of Lipids and Lipoproteins. APOE and LASS1 are among them. Thus, we assume the prior probability of an interaction of these genes to be 1.0. It is likely that there are genes involved in lipid and lipoprotein metabolism in addition to the 228, and we conservatively propose there to be 300. We, therefore, assume the prior probability of identifying another interacting gene, such as HRAS1, to be 0.01. We set the posterior probability for identification of such a gene at 0.95. Applying Bayes theorem, we obtain the likelihood ratio Pr(Data|Association)/Pr(Data|NoAssociation) of 1881. These considerations are applicable to the initial test of the association with longevity of the combination of the haplotypes in the three genes in both the Georgia and Louisiana populations. The prior probability increases dramatically in subsequent tests, once the deficit accumulation in the Louisiana population is taken into account. The same 0.01 frequency cutoff was applied. This involved adjustment for up to two comparisons, using the sequential Dunn-Sidak procedure. The haplotype combination frequencies differed significantly in the various samples examined. These haplotypeLi L, Kim S, Kimball B, Jazwinski SM, Arnold J, for the Georgia Centenarian Study. Exact sample size needed to detect dependence in x x tables. Biometrics. De Benedictis G, Tan Q, Jeune B, Christensen K, Ukraintseva SV, Bonafe M, Franceschi C, Vaupel JW, Yashin AI. Recent advances in human gene-longevity association studies. Mech. Ageing Dev. Dickson RC. More chores for TOR: de novo ceramide synthesis. Cell Metab. Dmello NP, Childress AM, Franklin DS, Kale SP, Pinswasdi C, Jazwinski SM. Cloning and characterization of LAG, a longevity gene in yeast. J. Biol. Chem. Acknowledgments: Supported by grants from the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health (P01 AG017553 and P01 AG022064) and by the Louisiana Board of Regents through the Millennium Trust Health Excellence Fund [HEF(2001-06)-02]. We thank the people of Georgia and Louisiana for participation in our study. We acknowledge the valuable recruitment, data acquisition, data management, and fiscal management efforts of M. Burgess, K. Grier, E. Jackson, E. McCarthy, K. Shaw, L. Strong, S. Reynolds, S. Anderson, E. Cassidy, M. Janke, T. Savla, M. Durden, M. Cervantes, D. Rouzan and T. Beard. Additional authors include for The Georgia Centenarian Study: R.C. Green, M.Gearing,W.R.Markesbery,J.L.Woodard,M.A.Johnson,J.S.Tenover,I.C.Siegler,P.Martin,M.MacDonald,C.Rott,W.L.Rodgers,and A.Davey; for The Louisiana Healthy Aging Study: M.Allen, I.E.Antikainen, A.M.Arce, J.Arceneaux, E.O.Boudreaux, L.Byerley, P.A.Callinan, C.M.Champagne, H.Cheng,Y.-w.Chiu,L.Cosenza,M.E.Cress,M.Czarny-Ratajczak,J.P.DeLany,J.Denver,A.Deutsch,M.J.deVeer,D.A.Dobrosielski,R.Ellis,A.Ermolao,M.Erwin,M.Erwin,J.Fabre,E.Fontham,M.Frisard,P.Geiselman,L.Goodwin,V.Greco,S.Hadie,T.Hall,M.Hamilton,S.W.Herke,K. Evert J, Lawler E, Bogan H, Perls T. Morbidity profiles of centenarians: survivors, delayers, and escapers. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. Excoffier L, Laval G, Schneider S. Arlequin ver.: an integrated software package for population genetics data analysis. Evol. Bioinform. Online. Finch CE, Ruvkun G. The genetics of aging. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. Flint J, Mackay TF. Genetic architecture of quantitative traits in mice, flies, and humans. Genome Res. Gabriel SB, Schaffner SF, Nguyen H, Moore JM, Roy J, Blumenstiel B, Higgins J, Delice M, Lochner A,Faggart M,Liu-Cordero SN,Rotimi C,Adeyemo A,Cooper R,Ward R,Lander ES,Daly MJ and Altshuler D.The structure of haplotype blocks in the human genome.Science.Guillas I, Jiang JC, Vionnet C, Roubaty C, Uldry D, Chuard R, Wang J, Jazwinski SM, Conzelmann A. Human homologues of LAG reconstitute Acyl-C-dependent ceramide synthesis in yeast.J. Biol. Chem. Hong MG, Reynolds C, Gatz M, Johansson B, Palmer JC, Gu HF, Blen- now K, Kehoe PG, de Faire U, Pedersen NL, Prince JA. Evidence that the gene encoding insulin degrading enzyme influences human lifespan. Hum. Mol. Genet. Jazwinski SM. Longevity, genes and aging. Science. Jazwinski SM, Conzelmann A. LAG puts the focus on ceramide signaling.Int. J. Biochem.Cell Biol.Jiang JC,Kirchman PA,Allen M and Jazwinski SM.Suppressor analysis points to the subtle role of the LAG ceramide synthase gene in determining yeast longevity.Exp.Gerontol.Kenyon C.The plasticity of aging: insights from long-lived mutants.Cell.KoybasiTF () Genetic architecture of quantitative traits in mice, flies, and humans. Genome Res., Gabriel SB, Schaffner SF, Nguyen H, Moore JM, Roy J, Blumenstiel B, Higgins J, Delice M, Lochner A, Faggart M, Liu-Cordero SN, Rotimi C, Adeyemo A, Cooper R, Ward R, Lander ES, Daly MJ, Altshuler D () The structure of haplotype blocks in the human genome. Science, Guillas I, Jiang JC, Vionnet C, Roubaty C, Uldry D, Chuard R, Wang J, Jazwinski SM, Conzelmann A () Human homologues of LAG reconstitute Acyl-CoA-dependent ceramide synthesis in yeast. J. Biol. Chem., Hong MG, Reynolds C, Gatz M, Johansson B, Palmer JC, Gu HF, Blen- now K, Kehoe PG, de Faire U, Pedersen NL, Prince JA () Evidence that the gene encoding insulin degrading enzyme influences human lifespan. Hum. Mol. Genet., Jazwinski SM () Longevity, genes and aging. Science., Jazwinski SM, Conzelmann A () LAG puts the focus on ceramide signaling. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol., Jiang JC, Kirchman PA, Allen M,Jazwinski SM () Suppressor analysis points to the subtle role of the LAG ceramide synthase gene in determining yeast longevity. Exp. Gerontol., Kenyon C () The plasticity of aging: insights from long-lived Schachter F,Faure-Delanef L,Guenot F,Rouger H,Froguel P,Leseur-Ginot L,Cohen D (1994) Genetic associations with human longevity - a case-control study of candidate genes. Mech. Ageing Dev., Kulminski AM, Ukraintseva SV, Culminskaya IV, Arbeev KG, Land KC, Akushevich L, Yashin AI () Cumulative deficits and physiological indices as predictors of mortality and long life. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci., Kusminski CM, Shetty S, Orci L, Unger RH, Scherer PE () Diabetes and apoptosis: lipotoxicity. Apoptosis., Mahley RW, Rall SJ () Apolipoprotein E: far more than a lipid transport protein. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet., Mehta R, Steinkraus KA, Sutphin GL, Ramos FJ, Shamieh LS, Huh A, Davis C, Chandler-Brown D, Kaeberlein M () Proteasomal regulation of the hypoxic response modulates aging in C. elegans. Science., Menuz V, Howell KS, Gentina S, Epstein S,Riezman I,Fornallaz-Mulhauser M,Hengartner MO,Gomez M,Riezman H,Martinou JC () Protection of C. elegans from anoxia by HYL-2 ceramide synthase. Science., Migliaccio E,Giorgio M,Mele S,Pelicci G,Reboldi P,Pandolfi PP,Lanfrancone L,Pelicci PG () The p66(shc) adaptor protein controls oxidative stress response and life span in mammals. Nature., Ogretmen B,Hannun YA () Biologically active sphingolipids in cancer pathogenesis and treatment. Nat. Rev. Cancer., Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Donnelly P () Inference of population structure using multilocus genotype data. Genetics., Arch. Intern. Med., Thornton-Wells TA, Moore JJ, Haines JL () Genetics, statistics and human disease: analytical retooling for complexity. Trends Genet., Tishkoff SA, Pakstis AJ, Ruano G, Kidd KK () The accuracy of statistical methods for estimation of haplotype frequencies: an example from the CD4 locus. Am. J. Hum. Genet., Watkins WS, Rogers AR, Ostler CT, Wooding S, Bamshad MJ, Brassington AM, Carroll ML, Nguyen SV, Walker JA, Prasad BV, Reddy PG, Das PK, Batzer MA, Jorde LB () Genetic variation among world populations: inferences from  Alu insertion polymorphisms. Genome Res., Willcox BJ, Donlon TA, He Q, Chen R,Grove JS,Yano K,Masaki KH,Willcox DC,Rodriguez B,Curb JD () FOXO3A genotype is strongly associated with human longevity. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA., Witting SR,Maiorano JN,Davidson WS () Ceramide enhances