The Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha 308G/A Polymorphism is Associated with Dementia in the Oldest Old. Bruunsgaard, MD, PhD, Thomas L. Benfield, MD, DrSci, Andersen-Ranberg, MD, PhD,z Jacob v. B. Hjelmborg, MD, PhD,z N. Pedersen, MD, PhD,k Marianne Schroll, MD, DrSci,z Bente K. Pedersen, MD, Bernard Jeune, MDz

OBJECTIVES: To test the hypothesis that the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) GA promoter gene polymorphism is a risk factor in age-related dementia and longevity.

DESIGN: A cross-sectional and a longitudinal study.

SETTING: A population-based sample of Danish centenarians.

PARTICIPANTS: One hundred-year-old Danes (n) from The Longitudinal Study of Danish Centenarians. Octogenarians (n) and healthy volunteers aged to (n) served as reference groups.

METHODS: Whether the distribution of TNF GG/GA/AA genotypes were different in centenarians than in younger age groups was investigated (Fisher exact test). Furthermore, whether the TNF GA polymorphism was associated with the prevalence of dementia (logistic regression analysis), the plasma level of TNF-a (analysis of variance), and mortality in the following years (Cox regression analysis) within the cohort of centenarians was tested.

RESULTS: The distribution of TNF genotypes was not different across the three different age groups, but the GA genotype was associated with decreased prevalence of dementia in centenarians. The few centenarians with AA carrier status had higher mortality risk and tended to show higher plasma levels of TNF-a, but the significance was questionable due to a low number of subjects with this genotype.

CONCLUSION: It is possible that the TNF 308 A allele is maintained during aging because subjects who are heterozygous for this polymorphism possess the optimal inflammatory response with regard to protection against age-related neurodegeneration. J Am Geriatr Soc 52:1361-1366, 2004.

Key words: TNF-a; centenarians; dementia; polymorphism

METHODS: Whether the distribution of TNF 308 GG/GA/AA genotypes were different in centenarians than in younger age groups was investigated (Fisher exact test). Furthermore, whether the TNF 308 GA polymorphism was associated with the prevalence of dementia (logistic regression analysis), the plasma level of TNF-a (analysis of variance), and mortality in the following 5 years (Cox regression analysis) within the cohort of centenarians was tested.

Although dementia is common, it is not inevitable in the oldest old (e.g., 51% of a population-based cohort of Danish centenarians suffered from mild to severe dementia). In this cohort, plasma levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a were higher than in younger age groups (80-year-olds, a middle-aged group, and young controls), and a high concentration was associated with dementia and peripheral atherosclerosis in centenarians. Moreover, TNF-a was a strong predictor of the mortality risk in the following 6 years, independent of dementia and cardiovascular disease, suggesting that TNF-a had specific biological effects and was a marker of frailty in centenarians. However, it is still unclear whether high plasma levels of TNF-a were causative factors or acted as markers of underlying pathological processes in dementia and cardiovascular diseases.

The distribution of TNF 308 genotypes was not different across the three different age groups, but the GA genotype was associated with decreased prevalence of dementia in centenarians. The few centenarians with AA carrier status had higher mortality risk and tended to show higher plasma levels of TNF-a, but the significance was questionable due to a low number of subjects with this genotype.

Constitute the major categories of age-related dementia, but in centenarians, it is difficult to distinguish between the two. It has been suggested that neuropathological lesions of AD and cerebrovascular lesions are necessary for the development of reduced cognitive function and dementia in very old people. Inflammation is an integral part of the pathology of AD and VaD, and several studies have described that increased TNF-a levels in the cerebrospinal fluid and in the circulation accompany both. It is unclear whether local inflammatory mechanisms cause damage in the central nervous system (CNS) or if they are present to remove the detritus from other, more primary pathological processes. It is also unclear whether endogenous TNF-a is neurotoxic (based largely on acute interventions) or neuroprotective (based largely on studies on genetically modified animals) during inflammatory processes in the CNS (e.g., functional outcomes in TNF-a knockout mice were improved earlier after brain injury than in wild-type mice, butedited:

The study subjected DNA to three cycles at 951°C for 5 seconds, 661°C for 10 seconds, and 721°C for 20 seconds, followed by a melting curve analysis. The melting temperatures were 851°C for the G allele and 651°C for the A allele.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Centenarians
One hundred and twenty-two centenarians from the Danish Centenarian Study participated in the study, including 28 men. This cohort has been previously described. Briefly, The Danish Centenarian Study is a nationwide epidemiological survey of all individuals living in Denmark who celebrated their 100th birthday from April 1, 1995, to May 31, 1996 (N = 276). All participants were identified in the Civil Registration System in Denmark and admitted to the study as they turned 100. The participation rate was 75% (n = 207). There was no difference between participants and nonparticipants regarding sex and the proportion living at home or in a nursing home. The same geriatrician (KA-R) and a geriatric nurse performed an interview and a physical examination at the place of the subject's residence within five months of the anniversary, and a review of medical records was conducted. Not all subjects agreed to a blood test and a full physical examination; accordingly, the TNF-308 G4A polymorphism was analyzed.

Plasma Cytokines and CRP in Centenarians
Plasma was stored at -80°C. Ethylenediaminetetraacetate was used as an anticoagulant. Levels of TNF-a and IL-6 were measured using high sensitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits, and IL-8 was measured using Quantikine ELISA kits from R & D Systems (Abingdon, UK), as previously described. All samples and standards were run as duplicates, and the mean was used in statistical analyses. The detection limits were 0.1 to 0.2 pg/mL for TNF-a and IL-6, and 1 to 2 pg/mL for IL-8. The intra-assay and interassay coefficients of variations were 16% and 25% for TNF-a, 9% and 15% for IL-6, and less than 10% for IL-8. CRP levels were measured using a standardized high-sensitivity assay in the central laboratory of Odense University Hospital.

Octogenarians and Young Controls
One hundred seventy-eight 85-year-olds, including 66 men, were from the 1914 cohort, Research Center for Prevention and Health, Glostrup, Denmark. Blood samples were collected during a home visit as a part of the survey of 85-year-olds in 2000. Collection of blood samples from 47 young volunteers (18-30), including 14 men, took place during the same time period.

RESULTS
The TNF-308 G4A genotypes were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in centenarians and in 85-year-olds and young controls, and there was no difference in the distribution of genotypes or the prevalence of A-allele carriers between the three age groups (Table 1). There was no interaction between sex and the TNF-308 genotype in a multinomial logistic regression analysis including the three age groups as the dependent variable and the three genotypes, sex, and an interaction between sex and genotype as independent variables (data not shown).

Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS, version 11.0 (SPSS Corp., Chicago, IL) and Stata 8 (Stata Corp., College Station, TX). Fisher exact test and multinomial logistic regression analyses were used to investigate changes in the distribution of the TNF-308 G4A polymorphism across different age groups. A binary logistic regression analysis was used to evaluate whether dementia was associated with the polymorphism, adjusted for the effect of sex and an interaction between sex and the polymorphism (cross-sectional analysis). Cox regression models were used to explore associations between the polymorphism and survival (longitudinal analysis). Confounders in the survival analysis included dementia and plasma levels of TNF-a representing known predictors of the mortality risk in the population of centenarians. Survival analyses were statistically stratified by dementia (assuming different baseline hazard functions in demented and nondemented centenarians) and sex (assuming different baseline hazard functions in men and women) to exclude the possibility of linear and nonlinear interactions between these parameters and the TNF polymorphism. Analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were used to detect differences in circulating levels of inflammatory markers (dependent variable) in relation to the TNF-a polymorphism (independent variable). Probit plots were used to check for normality in the distribution of inflammatory markers. To approximate normality, TNFAssociated with neurotoxicity, it has been suggested that TNF-a contributes to early neuronal injury but could improve recovery. The role of TNF-a in CNS repair is not yet well-described, but the present data indicate that this aspect is important in centenarians who have survived to advanced age. There was no difference in plasma levels of TNF-a between centenarians with the GG and GA genotypes, in accordance with other studies. TNF-a tended to be higher in subjects with the AA genotypes in the present study, but the difference was not significant. The power of the ANOVA is poor because of the low number of subjects who had the AA genotype, and the large interpersonal variance in plasma levels of TNF-a makes it impossible to assess whether there is a difference. It has been suggested that a multifactorial process regulates the circulating TNF-a level, whereas local TNF-a production might be of greater importance and under more control by specific polymorphisms. The sample size is small. It was decided not to pool centenarians with GA and AA genotypes because their associations with dementia and mortality seemed to differ, but the low number of subjects with AA makes it difficult to evaluate the effect of this genotype, as already discussed. However, differences between GG and GA were unaffected when the AA genotype was excluded from the statistical analyses.

Few studies have investigated the relationship between the TNF 308 G4A polymorphism and dementia. In particular, the 308 A allele is strongly associated with the HLA-DR3 allele and it cannot be excluded that the associations between the polymorphism, dementia, and mortality risk in this study reflect linkage with genes of the major histocompatibility complex. Furthermore, the balance in the cytokine network and combinations of different cytokine polymorphisms are probably also important for clinical outcome. Age-related dementia was not subclassified in this study because it was difficult to differentiate; the onset of dementia was often unknown, most centenarians or their relatives did not agree to a brain autopsy, and it was not possible to perform brain imaging to make a proper evaluation of VaD in this frail cohort. However, half of the demented population had atrial fibrillation or hypertension or experienced a stroke/transient cerebral ischemia, indicating at least a coexisting vascular component. In 12% of the demented centenarians, a history of a systemic disease with potential influence on cognitive function was found (e.g., hypothyroidism, vitamin B or folic acid deficiency, and Parkinson's disease), but these subjects could also have had AD or VaD.

Kroeger KM et al. Effects of stimulus and cell type on the expression of the tumor necrosis factor promoter polymorphism. Cytokine 2000; 12: 1108-14.
Louis E et al. Tumour necrosis factor (TNF) gene polymorphism influences TNF-alpha production in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated whole blood cell culture in healthy humans. Clin Exp Immunol 1998; 113: 401-6.
Santos AR et al. Role of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-10 promoter gene polymorphisms in leprosy. J Infect Dis 2002; 186: 1687-91.
Hajeer AH, Hutchinson IV. Influence of TNFalpha gene polymorphisms on TNFalpha production and disease. Hum Immunol 2001; 62: 1191-9.
Alvarez V et al. Association between the TNFalpha -308 A/G polymorphism and the onset-age of Alzheimer disease. Am J Med Genet 1999; 88: 496-8.
Andersen-Ranberg K et al. Healthy centenarians do not exist, but autonomous centenarians do: A population-based study of morbidity among Danish centenarians. J Am Geriatr Soc 2001; 49: 900-8.
Bruunsgaard H et al. Predicting death from TNF-alpha and IL-6 in 80-year-old people. Clin Exp Immunol 2003; 132: 24-31.
Barger SW et al. Tumor necrosis factors alpha and beta protect neurons against amyloid beta-peptide toxicity: Evidence for involvement of a kappa B-binding factor and attenuation of peroxide and Ca accumulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1995; 92: 9328-32.
Brucki SM et al. Altered neuronal and microglial responses to excitotoxic and ischemic brain injury in mice lacking TNF receptors. Nat Med 1999; 5: 788-94.
Tarkowski E et al. Intracerebral production of tumor necrosis factor-alpha, a local neuroprotective agent, in Alzheimer disease andPROCESSED TEXT: physical disabilities