PDF Linearization, Optimization, Protection Page inserted by the evaluation version www.pdflib.com sales@pdflib.com

Longevity and Heredity in Humans: Association with the Human Leucocyte Antigen Phenotype

A. M. LAGAAY, J. DAMARO, G. J. LIGTHART, G. M. Th. SCHREUDER, J. J. van ROOD, AND W. HIJMANS

Section of Gerontology and Department of Immunohematology, University of Leiden, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands

It is still not understood why some people live to be very old while others die at an earlier age from natural causes. There are several arguments supporting the hypothesis that genetic factors are important in this respect. Both average and maximum lifespan are fixed for each species. Between species and also between different strains within a species, average lifespan differs, as in different strains of mice reared under identical laboratory conditions. Smith and Walford have demonstrated that in mice, the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) exerts a significant influence on lifespan. In mice, MHC is also associated with premature tumor incidence, a low immune response, less effective DNA repair and autoimmune disease [24]. These observations could indicate the existence of a biological clock governed by genetic factors.

Common knowledge has it that familial differences in longevity exist in humans and that these are at least partially accounted for by genetic factors: longevity runs in the family. Abbott et al. studied this scientifically by comparing the parental age at death of subjects who died at different ages [6]. There was a weak but significant trend for survival to increase with increasing age at death of the parent. This trend was more marked for maternal age at death and more evident for males than for females. Palmore in the Dukes longitudinal study partly confirmed these observations [7]. He found an influence of the father's age at death, and again, this was more evident in males. The mother's age at death had no influence.

An important study from Sorensen et al. in Denmark includes 960 individuals who had been separated from their biological parents in early childhood and reared by adoptive parents [8]. In those who died prematurely, that is between 16 and 58 years of age, there was a significant correlation with the death of one of the biological parents before the age of 50 (relative risk (RR) 1.71). There was no correlation with a premature death of one of the adoptive parents. The relative risk was higher regarding infectious (RR 5.8) or vascular (RR 4.5) causes of death. These findings may be interpreted as evidence for a genetic effect on the immune system.

The HLA region is located on the short arm of the sixth chromosome. It codes for immunological repertoire in its broadest sense. A characteristic property is extreme polymorphism. In man, several associations between HLA antigens and disease exist with a relative risk which varies from 1.3 to 358 [25]. Therefore, we studied the HLA system for genes associated with longevity.

Detecting these genes in humans is more difficult than in mice since humans are an outbred population with inherent genetic heterogeneity. In addition, there are no possibilities to control other exogenous variables that may influence longevity. Even if ethnic and geographic matching between the study population and the control group is assured, considerable genetic heterogeneity persists so that HLA types cannot be compared against a common background. For these reasons, Walford et al. stated that it would be a more fruitful approach to do HLA typing in family studies or to determine the segregation of certain traits with haplotypes.

Previous studies on associations between HLA antigens and longevity in different age groups are limited, and their results are not uniform. It is essential that the study population and the young control group share the same genetic and geographic background, and that both groups consist of large enough numbers for statistical analysis. The age difference between the two groups must be adequate, or age-brackets should be provided. Only some of the previous studies fulfill these requirements. In the following, we will briefly review the most important findings from the literature.

Recently, the Japanese group of Takata et al. reporting on the oriental population of Okinawa, Japan mentioned an extremely low frequency of HLA-DRw9 in nona- and centenarians as compared to younger age groups, and also a frequency of HLA-DR1 of 10.0 and 6.1% in nona- and centenarians, respectively, while DR1 was absent in younger age groups. Since HLA-B40 is linked to DRw9 in the Japanese population, its frequency was decreased as well [10]. Macurova et al. in Prague described a marked difference in many antigens [11].

In athe distribution of HLA antigens between the study population and the control group, except for HLA-B40 and HLA-DR5. To ensure an ethnically homogeneous sample, nine elderly subjects of non-Caucasoid parentage were excluded. The study involved 964 subjects of 85 years and older and 2444 subjects of 20-35 years of age. The HLA typing was performed using standard lymphocytotoxicity and a two-color fluorescence test for class II antigens. The results showed statistically significant differences in HLA-B40 and HLA-DR5 frequency in females aged 85 years and over. The frequencies of homozygotes were not different between the young and old age groups. The study provides evidence that we are looking at two generations of the same population, with no indication of major demographic changes occurring during this century. Further studies on linkage of different HLA classes are needed to understand their association with life span, diseases, or aging processes.HLA frequencies were compared between different age groups (FIG.2). Gerkins et al., Macurova et al., and Converse and Williams reported an 18% increase in heterozygosity in the old age group. However, this finding was not confirmed in other studies. In our study, heterozygosity did not differ significantly compared to the young age group. It is intriguing that the differences in HLA frequency for both B40 and DR5 were more evident in females. This raises the question of whether this could be a key to understanding the difference in life expectancy between the sexes. However, further studies are needed to answer this question. This also leads us to consider the possibility of longevity genes being located outside the HLA region. With this in mind, the sex chromosome and even mitochondrial DNA could be proposed as possible sites. It has been postulated that the double X-chromosome is favorable for an extended length of life, possibly due to hormonal influence or an overcapacity of the immune system, provided by nature to ensure maximum reproductive success for females.

Our study did not detect a significant decrease in the frequency of established disease-associated HLA antigens such as B27, B8, and DR4 in the oldest age group. However, several arguments should be considered in this respect. Firstly, our control group consisted of blood donors selected on the basis of health criteria, which could result in a lower frequency of disease-associated HLA antigens than in the total population. Secondly, these HLA-associated disorders do not necessarily lead to an early death. On the other hand, this negative finding could emphasize the postulated advantage of these disease-associated HLA antigens for maintaining species survival.

Another study by Lagaay et al. reported similar findings with regards to autoimmune disease-associated HLA antigens in both young and old age groups selected on health criteria. This casts doubt on the significance of the Okinawa results or the strictness of the health criteria employed.

It is not clear at what age differences in HLA frequencies would show. Is it at middle age when diseases like cancer, cardiovascular disorders, and rheumatoid arthritis take their toll? Or is it in the oldest age group where beneficial longevity genes would become manifest? We are presently integrating the life expectancy curve into the data of HLA phenotype to investigate this question.

The idea of the existence of longevity genes is difficult to understand in the light of Darwin's theory of evolution. However, Hayflick has recently proposed an interesting theory on this topic. He suggests that parents would have a selective advantage in maintaining their physiological vigor after sexual maturation to ensure maximum parental fitness for survival of slowly maturing human progeny. The reserve capacity, present in virtually all organs, is the essential element in determining post-developmental longevity.

In conclusion, age-related differences in HLA antigens should not distract us from the importance of prevention, lifestyle, and other non-genetic factors that contribute to reaching an active, healthy, and independent old age. Our study found no significant association between HLA and longevity in a large and ethnically homogeneous population aged 85 years and over in the Dutch community of Leiden. However, further studies are needed to fully understand the biological meaning of these results.persons. Tissue Antigens 25: 27-31. YARNELL, J. W. G., A. S. ST. LEGER, I. C. BALFOUR & R. B. RUSSELL. The distribution, age effects, and disease associations of HLA antigens and other blood group markers in a random sample of an elderly population. J. Chronic Dis. 33: 97-105. HANSEN, H. E., J. V. SPARCK & S. LARSEN. An examination of HLA frequencies in three age groups. Tissue Antigens 5: 9-16. BENDER, K., A. MAYEROVA, KLOTZBUCHERK, BURCKHARDT & C.H.T.A.. No indication of postnatal selection at the HL-A loci. Tissue Antigens 9: 379-386.
BLACKWELD, E.W., K.K.MITTAL,P.M.MCNAMARA & F.J.PAYNE.Lack of association between HLA and age in an aging population.Tissue Antigens 5:233-236.
GREENBERG,L.J.Aging and immune function in man: influence of sex and genetic background.In Aging and Immunity.S.K.Singhal,M.R.Sinclair & C.R.Stiller,Eds.Elsevier,North Holland Inc.Amsterdam.
THOMPSON,J.S.,D.R.WEKSTEIN,J.L.RHOADES,C.KIRKPATRICK,S.A.T.Roszman,R.W.Straus & N.TIETZ.The immune system of healthy centenarians.J.Americ.Geriatr.Soc.
GERKINS,V.R.,A.TING,H.T.MENCK,J.P.CASSAGRANDPE,I.TERASAKI&M.C.PIKE.HL-A heterozygosity as a genetic marker of long-term survival.J.Natl.Cancer Inst.63:63-67.
CONVERSE,P.J.& D.R.R.WILLIAMS.Increased HLA-B heterozygosity with age.Tissue Antigens 12:295-298.
PROUST,J.,R.MOULIAS,F.FUMERON,B.EKKHOUCHMA,M.BUSSON,M.SCHMID & J.HORS. HLA and longevity.Tissue Antigens 34: 1-8.
TIWARI,J.L.& P.I.TERASAKI,eds.In HLA and disease associations.Springer-Verlag New York,Inc.KRAMER, J., E.GYODI & G.FUST. Usefulness of densitometry in typing of human complement component C4.Immunogenetics 3: 285-290.
PANDEY,J.P.,H.H.FUDENBERG & G.B.LOADHOLT. HLA antigens in different age groups.Ric.Clin.Lab.5:157-162.
WALFORD,R.L. MHC regulation of aging: an extension of the immunologic theory of aging.In Modern Biological Theories of Aging.H.R.Warner et al.,Eds.Raven Press.New York.
WAINSCOAT,J.S.,T.E.A.PETO & A.WASWO. HLA genes and longevity (letter).Lancet ii: 352-353.
HODGE,S.E.& R.L.WALFORD. HLA distribution in aged normals.In Histocompatibility Testing P.I.Terasaki,Ed.UCLA.Los Angeles.
SMITH,D.W.E.& H.R.WARNER.Does genotypic sex have a direct effect on longevity?Exp.Gerontol.6: 303-310.
LIGTHART,G.J.,J.X.CORBERAND,C.FOURNIER,P.GALANAUD,W.B.KENNESH,K.MULLER-HERMELIN & K.G.S.STEIMANN.Mech.Ageing Dev.10: 143-153.
HAYFLICK,L.Antecedents of cell aging research.Exp.Gerontol.3: 145-151.
TAI,A.H.,M.SUZUKI,T.ISHI,S.SEKIGUCHI & H.IRI.1987. Influence of major histocompatibility complex region genes on human longevity among Okinawan-Japanese centenarians and nonagenarians.Lancet ii: 824-826.
MACUROVA,H.,P.IVANYI,J.SAJDLOVA & J.TROJAN.1975. HL-A antigens in aged persons.Tissue Antigens 25: 27-31.
YUNIS,E.J.,G.FERNANDEZ,P.TEAGUE,0.SUTMAN & R.A.GOON.1972. The th