study, we utilized our two-dimensional gene scanning (TDGS) technology platform to screen two populations of centenarians for polymorphic variation in the BRCA1 breast cancer susceptibility gene. This gene is involved in genome maintenance and we found differences in BRCA1 genotype frequencies between the centenarian populations and controls. Our findings suggest that a genetic epidemiological approach could lead to new insights regarding the basic mechanisms of aging and longevity, as well as identifying new targets to prevent or retard some of the late-age adverse effects.

The success of the human genome project, combined with new technologies of genetic analysis, has greatly facilitated the identification of genes with inherited mutations that predispose to various age-related disorders, including specific cancers. Such genes are often involved in genome stability pathways to maintain DNA integrity. Examples include the DNA mismatch repair genes MLH1 and MSH2, heritable mutations in which predispose to colon cancer, and the breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2.

Increased genomic instability and mutation accumulation are causally related to the increased risk of cancer observed in individuals with heritable defects in these genes. Genomic instability in organs and tissues has also been considered a major cause of aging, leading to tissue atrophy, neoplasms, and increased loss of cellular function. This process could be driven by oxygen free radicals and other sources of spontaneous DNA damage, although unambiguous evidence for such a causal relationship is still lacking.

Oxidative stress induces genome rearrangement mutations such as large deletions, inversions or translocations. These types of mutation have been demonstrated to accumulate during aging in various tissues of normal mice. In this respect, it has been speculated that a relatively small number of such large mutations could destabilize the genome, leading to dysregulation of normal patterns of gene expression.

Ultimately, the quality of genome stability systems determines the rate and spectrum of mutation accumulation during aging. Evidence is accumulating that defects in those systems that control the frequency of large DNA rearrangement mutations are associated with symptoms of accelerated senescence, in both mice and humans. This is the case for mice with defects in double-strand break repair genes, which can be expected to greatly accelerate the rate of illegitimate recombinations. Recent evidence indicates that mice with inactivated genes involved in non-homologous end joining, i.e., Ku86, prematurely exhibit symptoms of age-related degeneration in various tissues, including liver, skin, and bone.

The possible role of genomic instability in aging is further exemplified by recent work investigating telomere maintenance in the preservation of tissue functioning during aging. In a study of third-generation telomerase-deficient mice, shortened life span was found to be accompanied by reduced capacity to respond to stresses such as wound healing, hematopoietic ablation, and an increased incidence of spontaneous malignancies. The results of these studies underscore that in proliferative organs, the early initiation of genetic instability due to telomere erosion can greatly accelerate age-related loss of cell viability and increase tumor formation.

An important body of evidence that large genomic mutations are causally related to the degenerative aspects of the aging process has been derived from human syndromes of accelerated aging, such as Werner syndrome. Werner syndrome is caused by a heritable mutation in a human homologue of the bacterial RecQ gene, termed WRN in humans. Cultured somatic cells from patients with Werner syndrome display an increased rate of somatic mutations and a variety of cytogenetic abnormalities.

TABLE 1 summarizes the pathways and some of the genes thus far identified that are involved in the suppression of large genomic mutations. Defects in many of these genes have been found associated with accelerated senescence but not always and not to the same extent. It is possible to test this by creating mouse models with a variety of knock-in variants of the relevant genome stability genes. However, an alternative and reasonable approach would be to compare frequencies of the various alleles of loci involved in genome maintenance and repair and more specifically the pathways listed in TABLE 1 in different human populations with characteristic aging-related phenotypes.

Thus far, association studies have been based on single polymorphisms in candidate genes. The best-known example in this respect is the observed lower frequency of the APOE4 variant in centenarians, a higher frequency of which had previously been found associated with sporadic Alzheimer's disease. However, any positive result could be due to an effect of the polymorphism on the function of the candidate gene or some other gene variant that is in linkage disequilibrium with the marker locus. It has recently been shown that the distances over which linkage disequilibrium acts are small, typically less than 3 kb, although these data have recently been challenged.

With the rapid emergence of complete sequence information for all human genes, it is theoretically possible to scrutinize all genes or families of genes suspected to be involved in a complex phenotype for all possible polymorphic variation in a group of subjects comparedeasier as a result of this technology. In a study by Cargill et al.26, the coding regions of 106 genes relevant to cardiovascular disease, endocrinology, and neuropsychiatry were systematically surveyed for all possible variants in a sample of mixed ethnic groups. Oligonucleotide chip array hybridization and DHPLC were used for this purpose. A total of 560 single nucleotide polymorphisms were discovered in these 106 genes. Halushka et al.27 used the same technology to assay 75 candidate genes to identify potentially functional SNPs involved in blood pressure homeostasis and hypertension. They screened a sample of 74 ethnically heterogeneous individuals with a range of hypertension phenotype diversity and discovered 387 SNPs in gene coding sequences, 54 of which were predicted to lead to altered protein.

There are two potential limitations to this approach. The first involves the relatively small number of genes that have been completely identified in terms of structure and function. Although almost all human genes are now available as ESTs, only a limited number have been defined by a complete cDNA sequence and functional pathway. Indeed, for only a few genes is a complete genomic sequence including 3 UTR, promoter, and flanking regions readily available. With the genome program drawing to a close in the next few years, it is reasonable to expect that most of these gaps will be filled soon and that complete sequence information and pathway assignments will be available.

A second potential limitation to screen directly for functional polymorphic variants involved in a complex trait involves the technology to screen multiple genes in large numbers of individuals for all possible sequence variation, which is still in its infancy. Most technology in this respect is limited by the need to PCR amplify each individual target sequence for mutational scanning. Moreover, the most advanced methods, such as the DNA chip method used in the two studies described above, involve relatively expensive technology that has not been completely validated (a significant number of variants are missed). A cost-effective method developed in our laboratory is based on extensive multiplex PCR to obtain the target fragments, which are subsequently analyzed on two-dimensional denaturing gradient gels for all possible sequence variants.28,29

The most reliable way of detecting DNA sequence alterations in genes is nucleotide sequencing, the gold standard in mutation detection. Sequencing is PCR-based with preparation of template on an exon-by-exon basis. This is expensive and labor-intensive, even in the semi-automated setting. Other mutation scanning techniques, e.g., single strand conformation polymorphism analysis, trade off accuracy for relative throughput. Many novel methods with the potential of both a high throughput and a high accuracy remain immature and unproven in practice. Moreover, virtually all methods rely on PCR amplification to obtain the target sequences.30

DGGE is a gel electrophoresis technique that allows for the separation of DNA differing by as little as one base pair, based on differences in temperature.31 A given DNA fragment comprises one or more melting domains representing a stretch of between about 50 and 500 base pairs with equal temperature (the temperature at which each base pair has a 50% probability in either the helical or the denatured state). Therefore, when a fragment migrates parallel to the gradient of denaturants (urea/formamide), the lowest melting domain will denature first and, because of the double-strandedness of the DNA strands, the fragment will be retarded in the gel. The melting of a domain is dependent on the base composition of the fragment; G-C base pairs have a higher melting temperature than A-T base pairs and the stacking interactions of the bases. Therefore, DNA sequence variations will be reflected by the positions in the gel where the fragments are halted.

To prevent complete melting of a DNA fragment consisting of one melting domain upon denaturation, GC-clamps (a stretch of 30 to 50 G and C bases) are introduced to the target DNA fragments.32 A convenient way of attaching a GC-clamp to the target fragment is by making it part of one of the primers.33 Without GC-clamping, a DNA fragment consisting of one melting domain will become completely single-stranded upon denaturation and run off the gel. By adding a GC-clamp, a single high melting domain is artificially created at one end of the target fragment. This will prevent complete melting and ensure that the fragment halts at the melting temperature of the target sequence. However, when the target DNA fragment consists of multiple melting domains, only mutations in the lowest melting domain are readily detected. To facilitate detection of all possible mutations, it is imperative that the target fragment represents only one melting domain. Fortunately, since the addition of a GC-clamp allows for stacking interactions with neighboring bases, the entire target fragment will often behave as one melting domain. However, this is not always the case, and in practice, the target fragment needs to be designed through the strategic positioning ofMore valuable than the study of single polymorphisms in candidate genes, as has been done so far. So far, a total of 7 polymorphic sites in 6 TDGS fragments in BRCA1 have been identified that give rise to an amino acid change. Owing to strong linkage disequilibrium, these 7 polymorphic sites generate only 6 different haplotypes, i.e., alleles (AF; TABLE 2). The frequencies of these alleles were compared between groups of centenarians and controls. Centenarians were selected for this study because breast cancer is extremely rare in such individuals of highly advanced age. Hence, it is possible that optimal sequence variants of this gene contribute to this extreme resistance, possibly as a consequence of its increased proficiency in the process of recombinational repair. Two different centenarian populations were studied, i.e., one population consisted of 102 centenarians from the New England area42 and one population consisted of 84 centenarians from Italy.43 The control population consisted of 97 individuals from Italy. All three populations were mainly white.

Frequency (%)
70
60
50
40
20
10

(HH Centenarians It (n=168)
[Hl Controls tt (n=194)
[17 Breast ovarian cancer probands(Shattuck-Eidens et al, 1997) (n=1590)
                   arians NE (n=198)1994) (n=650)= (n=54)1994) (n=322)

Haplotype/allele
APOE4

FIGURE 3: BRCA1 allele frequencies in two different centenarian populations and one control population (NE = New England; IT = Italy). The allele frequency of APOE4 has been determined in the same populations as a control and was compared with the results of Schchter et al.22. Results so far obtained indicate that there are no significant differences in BRCA1 allele (haplotype) frequencies among the three populations (FIG. 3). This also applied to the APOE4 variant that was included as a positive control. However, in keeping with earlier studies, the frequency of the APOE4 variant was lower in the centenarians as compared to controls (FIG. 3). Comparison to previously published results obtained from 795 breast and/or ovarian cancer probands sampled from the US and Europe40 confirmed that at the allele frequency level only minor differences are observed.

Although allele frequencies might give an early indication of possible population-specific effects of the different haplotypes and disease, actual association should be carried out using the frequencies of allele combinations (i.e., haplotype frequencies). As shown in FIGURE 4, the BRCA1 genotype aa showed to be more frequent in both centenarian groups compared to the control group (p = 0.1473), whereas genotype ab was less frequent (p = 0.0526). In this figure, the APOE4/E4 genotype was not found for any of the 99 New England centenarians and scored 2 times for the 27 control individuals in which this was present (FIG. 4).

The high number of genotypes and the low frequency of some of the alleles require analysis of large numbers of samples. Only when the sample repository is sufficiently high, reliable conclusions can be drawn regarding the frequencies of all genotypes including some of the rare ones. In this respect, especially haplotype f is of interest because of the presence of Arg356 instead of Gln356. There is evidence that Arg356 homozygosity is less frequent in breast cancer patients than in controls44 indicating that it may be protective against breast cancer. Although in our present study, the frequency of allele f with the Arg356 present was found to be slightly higher in centenarians, the number of individuals analyzed is still too low to draw any definite conclusions.

SUMMARY
One way to test possible causal relationships between various functional pathways and the aging process is to comparatively analyze polymorphic variation in genes participating in these pathways in elderly populations with different aging-related characteristics. The results of the Human Genome Project now make it feasible to identify most if not all genes involved in the candidate pathways that drive the aging process or confer longevity. For this purpose, efficient genotyping methods are needed that allow the comprehensive sequence analysis of multiple genes at the population level. Using our recently developed two-dimensional gene scanning (TDGS) technology platform, we demonstrated the feasibility of this approach by screening two different populations of centenarians for polymorphic variation in the BRCA1 breast cancer susceptibility gene. The results indicate that using this technology, relatively large numbers of individuals, i.e., hundreds, can be screened in a relatively short time for all possible sequence variants of this very large gene. Although the number of individuals analyzed is still insufficient to draw definite conclusions, a clear trend towards a difference inClamping genomic DNA fragments using the polymerase chain reaction improves the detection of single-base changes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA: GULDBERG, P., K.F. HENRIKSEN & F. GUTTLER. Molecular analysis of phenylketonuria in Denmark: % of the mutations detected by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Genomics: MOYRET, C., C. THEILLET, P.L. PUIG, et al. Relative efficiency of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and single-strand conformation polymorphism in the detection of mutations in exons 2 to 3 of the p gene. Oncogene: LI, D. & J. VIJG. Multiplex co-amplification of retinoblastoma gene exons after pre-amplification by long-distance PCR. Nucleic Acids Res.: VAN ORSOUW, N.J., R.K. DHANDA, R.D. RINES, et al. Rapid design of denaturing gradient-based two-dimensional electrophoretic gene mutational scanning tests. Nucleic Acids Res.: DHANDA, R.K., W. SMITH, C.B. SCOTT, et al. A simple system for automated two-dimensional electrophoresis: applications to genetic testing. Genet. Testing: VENKITARAMAN, A.R. Breast cancer genes and DNA repair. Science: SHATTUCK-EIDENS, D., A. OLIPHANT, M. MCCLURE, et al. BRCA sequence analysis in women at high risk for susceptibility mutations: risk factor analysis and implications for genetic testing. JAMA: FORD, D., D.F. EASTON & J. PETO. Estimates of the gene frequency of BRCA and its contribution to breast and ovarian cancer incidence. Am. J. Hum. Genet.: PERLS, T.T., K. BOCHEN, M. FREEMAN, et al. Validity of reported age and prevalence of centenarians in a New England sample. Age Ageing: DE BENEDICTIS, G., E. FALCONE, G. ROSE, et al. DNA multiallelic systems reveal gene/longevity associations not detected by diallelic systems: The APOB locus. Human Genet.: DUNNING, A.M., M. CHIANO, N.R. SMITH, et al. Common BRCA variants and susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancer in the general population. Hum. Mol. Genet.: