C4, BF, C3 Allele Distribution and Complement Activity in Healthy Aged People and Centenarians

Diego Bellavia, Giovanni Frada, Pietro Di Franco, Salvatore Feo, Claudio Franceschi, Paolo Sansoni, and Melchiorre Brai

Department of Immunology, Institute of Internal Medicine, and Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

The aim of this study was to examine the complement system and the distribution of some human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class III alleles (C4, BF) in healthy aged people (77 centenarians and 89 elderly subjects). We have also studied the alleles of C3, a complement component genetically unrelated to HLA, the immunochemical levels of C4 and C3 and serum functional hemolytic activity for classical (CH50) and alternative (AP50) complement pathways. The levels of C3 and C4 and the CH50 and AP50 were found to be within the normal range. The frequencies of C3, BF, and C4A alleles were similar in the cohorts that have been studied. For C4B null allele (C4BQO), a trend toward an increase in the older cohort was observed, although the differences were not significant after statistical correction. Our data suggest that the complement system is well-preserved in centenarians and elderly subjects and class III HLA antigens are equally distributed in aged cohorts.

Characterized by the absence of the phenotypic product (QO; quantity 0), BF is also polymorphic with less allotypes (12). In a previous study, the frequency distribution of class III alleles was investigated in Hungarian old people, and a lower frequency of C4AQO and C4BQO was observed suggesting that the presence of null alleles, especially C4BQO, can negatively influence life expectation (13,14). We could not confirm these data in a previous study in which we examined 82 Sicilian elderly persons (average age 80 years) and 304 controls (15). To better understand the influence of C4 and BF allomorphisms on the expectation of life, we studied the C4 and BF alleles in 77 centenarians and in 89 elderly subjects from Italy. We also analyzed the C3 alleles in these long-lived individuals to investigate the polymorphism of a complement component unrelated to HLA.

There are several studies that address the changing equilibrium of the immune system aging both in experimental animals and humans (1,2). Individuals usually exhibit changes of both T- and B-segments with a high proportion of aged individuals showing hypergammaglobulinemia and increased signs of autoimmunity (3-5), although usually without any of the associated pathologies. Innate immunity has also been studied in and generally there are no age-related changes if they are selected according to the criteria for health status (6). Several parameters of nonspecific immunity have been studied in long-lived people, but practically no information is available on their complement system. In this study, we examined the immunochemical levels of C4 and C3 and serum functional hemolytic activity of the classical (CH50) and the alternative (AP50) complement pathways to ascertain if changes of this segment of nonspecific immunity occur in the elderly.

Methods

The study groups included 77 healthy centenarians (13 males and 64 females, mean age 101.4 years, range 100 to 107 years), 89 elderly subjects (20 males and 69 females, mean age 72 range 70 to 89 years), and 235 young subjects less than 50 years old (134 males and 101 females, mean age 35 years, range 18 to 49 years). The elderly subjects were selected for being healthy according to the Senieur protocol (16). Centenarians were in good mental and physical condition. They were free of tumors or immunological disorders; most of them also fulfilled the criteria of the Senieur protocol. All the individuals under study were Italian and unrelated, and all of them gave their informed consent. The serum samples were fresh or stored at -80C until tested.

Some complement components are encoded by genes related to human leukocyte antigen (HLA). The HLA complex represents the system of immunity which is better defined at the genetic level, and there are data showing different distributions of certain HLA alleles in aged cohorts, as compared to young healthy controls (7-10). However, it is not yet known whether a clear-cut relation exists between HLA haplotypes and longevity and this raises the need for further studies on different HLA genes included in extended haplotypes with classical class I and IT antigens (11). Class III genes encode non-HLA-related products and also some of the complement components (C4, C2, and BF) inIn young subjects (n=224, age 13, frequency .03%), the widespread longevity in developed countries has rendered it possible to study healthy centenarians (27,28). Despite the identification of genetic units for certain human diseases (35), the great majority of individuals carrying such alleles are healthy. Even in diseased cohorts, the linkage of these alleles with certain HLA class I and II phenotypes makes it impossible to identify with certainty the genetic elements responsible for the disease. The partial defect of C4, a complement component of the classical pathway, which is potentially capable of damaging self-tissues when locally activated by immune complexes, is known to be fully compatible with good health. Finally, the distribution of class III alleles varies widely according to ethnic background; hence, inferences on their relationship to pathology have to be considered within this framework. Moreover, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) allele and haplotype frequencies differ markedly even within different regions of the same country (36). Any demographic change in recent times, like migration into or within a country or differential reproduction rates within ethnic subsets, rather than differences in fitness, could be responsible for observed different distributions. To partially overcome such confounding effects, our studied cohorts were recruited with contributions from Northern, Central, and Southern Italy; hence they represent the Italian population as a whole. To our knowledge, this is the first study of the complement system in centenarians and aged people. Our main findings are that the CH50 and AP50 complement hemolytic activity as well as the C3 and C4 serum concentrations are well preserved in both centenarians and elderly persons. Similar findings have already been reported when other aspects of nonspecific immunity have been examined in healthy elderly persons (6,29). The increase in CH50 and AP50 activities, previously reported in elderly persons (30), can be attributed to different criteria in the selection of the tested individuals. In our study, the centenarians and the elderly subjects were carefully selected for their healthy status, although the Senieur protocol should be revisited to be adapted to centenarians (6), and the controls were healthy blood donors.

The environment, including lifestyle, diet, and climate, influences longevity and the quality of life, but genetic factors also seem to play a role because lifespan is species-specific (31). Mice of different inbred strains show different longevity when reared in identical laboratory conditions (32). In humans, longevity has been shown to have often familial distribution, and the occurrence of concordance in premature death between adoptees and their biological parents also points towards genetic influences (7,33). The immune system is an important survival factor because it protects against foreign intruders, and it is one of the factors that contribute to efficiently controlling the selective pressures that are bringing human longevity to a higher limit. The immune system also exerts an influence on longevity per se and on the quality of life of elderly persons. This is less obvious, but it can be easily inferred because components of the immune system are finely regulated by genetic factors. Some of the pathological abnormalities more frequently observed in older age groups suggest that the immune system may be involved in their pathogenesis.

In conclusion, extreme longevity may not be a privilege of a few individuals endowed with exceptional genetic prerogatives but rather a potential attribute of the normal human genome with a certain tolerance for some variations not directly responsible for overt pathology. This study was supported by grants from the Ministero Universita Ricerca Scientifica e Tecnologica (40% nationally divided and 60% local) and by the Consiglio Nazionale Ricerca (grant 95.4383.04). We thank Prof. F.Tedesco for reviewing the manuscript and Prof. Maria Brai for statistical analysis.

Kramer and colleagues (13,14) reported a marked reduction in the frequency of C4QO allele in old Hungarian groups and concluded that individuals carrying this allele, especially males, may have considerably shorter life expectancy than individuals lacking a silent gene at this locus. These studies prompted us to evaluate class III and C3 alleles in healthy Italian aged people and centenarians, and we found that the allele frequency distribution of C4, BF, and C3 in the cohorts under study do not show any statistical difference. In the same direction, the preliminary data on the DNA polymorphism of the C4/21-0H region are of limited value because of the small number of studied samples (10 centenarians). The slight increase of C4BQO allele in centenarians suggests that C4BQO is not a negative survival factor. It is important to note that the oldest person in our cohort was a C4BQO heterozygote (female, 107 years old, haplotype = A3BlBQOSF). Females outnumber males 5:1 in the oldest cohort, but the distribution of alleles does not seem to beStudies in Man: The Senior Protocol. Dev.;  ;:  -  " Awdeh ZL, Alper CA. Inherited structural polymorphism of the fourth component of human complement. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA;  ;: &-  Sim E, Cross SJ. Phenotyping of human complement component C. Biochem.;  ;:  -  Zhang WJ, Kay PH, Cobain TJ, Dawkins RL. Callotyping on plasma or serum: application to routine laboratories. Hum Immunol.;  ;:  -  Kramer J, Gyodi E, Fust G. Usefulness of densitometry in typing human complement component C. Immunogenetics.;  ;:  -  Rittner C, Stradrnann-Bellinghausen B. Complement reference typing report and nomenclature revision. Complement Inflamm.;  ;:  -  Schneider PM. Complement DNA RFLP reference typing report. Inflamm.;  ;:  - Mayer MM. Complement and complement fixation. In: Kabat EA, Mayer MM, eds. Experimental Immunochemistry. Springfield, IL: Thomas;  ;:  -