Title: ACE and APOE Polymorphisms and Their Relationship with Dementia Status in Korean Centenarians

Authors: Yoon-Ho Choi, Ji-Hae Kim, Doh Kwan Kim, Jong-Won Kim, Duk-Kyung Kim, Mee Sook Lee, Cheol Ho Kim, and Sang Chul Park

Affiliations: 1 Department of Clinical Pathology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. 2 Department of Food and Nutrition, Hannam University, Daejeon, Korea. 3 Department of Biochemistry, Aging and Apoptosis Research Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Background:
Genetic polymorphisms of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) and apolipoprotein E (APOE) have been associated with human longevity and dementia in the elderly. However, it is not well known whether such putative longevity genes exert the same effects on different ethnic groups living in different environments.

Methods:
We conducted a cross-sectional study to investigate the distributions of ACE and APOE genotypes and their relations with dementia status in Korean centenarians. A total of 103 centenarians (13 men and 90 women, mean age 102.4 ± 2.6 years) were included in this study. The allele frequencies of the genes were compared with those of two control groups: 7232 apparently healthy adults (4100 men and 3132 women) of mean age 48.5 ± 9.6 years for the ACE genotyping, and 6435 adults (5008 men and 1427 women) of mean age 50.7 ± 7.9 years for the APOE genotyping. The dementia status of the centenarians was assessed by a clinical psychologist using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score.

Results:
The frequencies of genotypes and alleles of the ACE and APOE genes of the centenarians were not significantly different from those of the control groups. There was a lack of association between presence of the D allele on the ACE gene and dementia status. However, the frequency of the e4 allele of the APOE gene was significantly higher in centenarians with dementia than in centenarians without definitive dementia (9.1% versus 1.5%, p < .05).

Conclusions:
These results suggest that neither the ACE nor the APOE gene is significantly associated with longevity in the Korean population, but that the APOE e4 allele is still related to dementia even at age 100 and older.

Discussion:
Centenarians, who have survived various age-associated diseases and attained the extreme limit of human life, are the best subjects for the genetic study of longevity. Although twin studies have suggested that the heritability of life span would be no more than 30%, genetic factors seem to play an important role in exceptional longevity. When the survival of siblings of centenarians was compared with that of a control group who were from a similar birth cohort, the relative risk of survival to older age steadily increased with age for siblings of the centenarians.

The e4 allele of the APOE gene is known to be associated with a greater risk of Alzheimer's disease and coronary artery disease through lipoprotein metabolism and atherogenesis. Previous studies demonstrated a decrease in e4 allele frequency and an increase in e2 allele frequency in centenarians. However, most studies on genetic polymorphisms and longevity have been conducted in Caucasian populations. It is not known whether APOE polymorphisms influence longevity differently in Koreans compared with Caucasians. Compared with Caucasian populations, Asians are reported to carry lower frequencies of the APOE e4 allele. Given the differential environmental exposures experienced by Korean centenarians, potential gene-environmental interactions would also be expected to differ from Western Caucasians.

Recently, significant genetic associations with human longevity have been found at the HLA [human leukocyte antigen], ACE, APOE, and APOB loci. Among them, the association between ACE gene polymorphism and longevity is rather controversial. Schachter and colleagues first reported that the frequency of the D allele of the ACE gene was higher in French centenarians than in the control group. However, this finding was not confirmed in a later, larger, French centenarian cohort study. In Asian populations, the association was only found in a certain ethnic group in China. Meanwhile, the D allele has been associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular diseases such as myocardial infarction, left ventricular hypertrophy, and coronary heart disease in diabetes mellitus. In addition, the D allele was reported to be more frequent among Alzheimer's disease subjects than in controls. It seems paradoxical that such an allele with adverse effects on major diseases is also related to survival to extreme old age.

Materials and MethodsStatistical analysis was carried out using SAS (Statistical Application System, Version 6.10; SAS, Inc., Cary, NC).

RESULTS

The frequencies of the genotypes and alleles of the ACE and APOE genes in Korean centenarians and control groups are compared in Tables 1 and 2. The genotype distributions of the samples were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. There was no significant difference between the two groups in the overall distribution of the genotypes and alleles for the ACE gene. The frequencies of the e2 allele of the APOE gene in the centenarians and the control group were 6.3% and 6.4%, respectively. The frequencies of the e4 allele were 6.8% and 9.2%, respectively, which were not significantly different. Figure 1 presents the distribution of three alleles of the APOE gene according to the decade of subject age from the combined population of the control group and centenarians. Although it was not statistically significant, the frequency of the e4 allele slightly decreased after the eighth decade and tended to be lower in the centenarians. The e2 allele apparently did not indicate any age-dependent change in their proportion.

Dementia status was assessed with clinical dementia rating (CDR) scores: 0, no dementia; .5, dementia suspected; 1, mild dementia; 2, moderate dementia; and 3, severe dementia. Subjects were divided into two groups according to their dementia status. A CDR score of 0 or .5 indicated the absence of definitive dementia, while a score of 1, 2, or 3 indicated the presence of dementia.

The prevalence of dementia in centenarian subjects was 61.8% (55/89) by CDR criteria (a CDR score of 1, 2, or 3 indicating the presence of dementia). Table 3 shows the number and dementia status of the subjects according to the CDR score.

Dementia status was not determined by standardized Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III) or National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) criteria, but only by CDR scores. CDR, an instrument to assess the severity of dementia symptoms, is not an especially sensitive measure of cognitive function, particularly in very old and functionally dependent persons. However, there are few reports on the results of cognitive function tests in centenarians, so standardized protocols or normative data are not available for this specific group. As conventional cognitive assessment is often complicated by sensory impairment and medical illness (26), a simple CDR score might be useful in this setting to evaluate the dementia status in frail centenarians.

Although French and Chinese centenarian studies have presented an association between the ACE gene and longevity, the association has not been found in our Korean centenarians. The distribution of ACE genotypes in Korean people is different from that in the Western population (12,27), but similar to that in the Chinese and Japanese (7,28). Thus the discrepancy could not be explained merely by the difference of the allele proportions between ethnic groups.

The allele frequencies of the ACE and APOE genes were compared between centenarians without definitive dementia and those with dementia (Tables 4 and 5). The frequency of the D allele of the ACE gene in the centenarians with dementia was not significantly different from that in the centenarians without definitive dementia (37.3 % versus 45.6 %, p > .05). The frequency of the e4 allele of APOE was significantly higher in centenarians with dementia than in those without definitive dementia (9.1% versus 1.5%, p < .05). However, it is a potential limitation of the analysis that this comparison was based on a single centenarian subject with APOE e4 and without definitive dementia.

Farrer and colleagues (15) reported that the D allele was more frequent among Alzheimer's disease subjects aged 66 to 70 than in controls. However, in a Japanese study, the frequency of II genotypes of ACE was 1.4 times higher in Alzheimer's disease subjects than in controls, while that of DD genotypes was only 0.4 times as high (29). In our study, there was no significant association between ACE polymorphism and dementia status in Korean centenarians. It seems that the ACE gene confers such weak effects on the cardiovascular system, cognitive function, or longevity that they are easily offset by other factors. Therefore, the genetic effects of ACE seem to be revealed only in a very homogeneous group with the same genetic and environmental factors. Although we could not find a significant association between ACE polymorphism and the dementia status of centenarians, the possibility of a type II error, i.e., the existing association was not found because of insufficient power, remains. Further studiesCompared with the 33.7% frequency of the e4 allele in elderly Alzheimer's disease cases, the absolute percentage of the e4 allele (9.1%) in demented centenarians is very small. This finding supports the contention of Asada and colleagues (22) that the frequency of the e4 allele in Alzheimer's disease subjects decreases with age. Onset of Alzheimer's disease, the prevalence of which increases markedly in the very old. Therefore, the influence of the e4 allele on Alzheimer's disease might increase with advancing age. Furthermore, APOE alleles have a significant impact on the age of onset of Alzheimer's disease. Therefore, it is plausible that for the population with a relatively short lifespan, the e4 allele could have a reduced chance to lead to Alzheimer's disease and hence contribute less to this disease mortality. The average life expectancy for the Korean population was 62 in 1971, 66 in 1981, and 71 in 1991; about 5-10 years shorter than that for developed countries. Although the overall distribution of the APOE allele in Korean centenarians was not statistically different from that in the control population, it was noticed that the frequency of the e4 allele gradually decreased after the eighth decade and tended to be lower in the centenarians. However, the e2 allele did not show any age-dependent change in its proportion (Figure 1). This finding suggests that the e4 allele may have a noticeable effect on survival disadvantage, as previously reported from Western countries. Therefore, the important determinant for longevity of Korean people may be the absence of the e4 allele rather than the presence of the e2 allele. This hypothesis is concordant with a previous report by Gerdes and colleagues (32). We found that the frequency of the e4 allele was significantly higher in demented centenarians than in non-demented centenarians. This finding suggests that the e4 allele has an effect on dementia status even among centenarians.

In summary, the present Korean centenarian study produced rather different results about the effect of ACE and APOE polymorphisms on human longevity and dementia. It is not surprising that Asian people with different genetic and environmental backgrounds show different results from Westerners in research on multifactorial phenomena. Our data disproved the association of the D allele of the ACE gene with longevity and dementia. One possible explanation may be that the effect of the allele is sufficiently mild as to be buffered by environmental and other genetic factors. Nevertheless, the limitation of the study due to small sample size needs to be overcome in future research for a definitive conclusion to be made. The genetic polymorphism of APOE was not significantly different between the centenarians and control population. However, e4 allele frequency showed a tendency to decrease at extremely old age. It was found that the unfavorable effect of the e4 allele on dementia status is still remarkable among centenarians.

REFERENCES
- Schunkert H, Hense H-W, Holmer SR, et al. Association between a deletion polymorphism of the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene and left ventricular hypertrophy. N Engl J Med.;  ; :
- Ruiz J, Blanche H, Cohen N, et al. Insertion/deletion polymorphism of the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene is strongly associated with coronary heart disease in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.;  ; :
- Farrer LA, Sherbatich T, Keryanov SA, et al. Association between angiotensin-converting enzyme and Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol.;  ; :
- Corder EH, Saunder AM, Strittmatter WJ, et al. Gene dose of apolipoprotein E type allele and risk of Alzheimer's disease in late-onset families. Science.;  ; :
- Mahley RW. Apolipoprotein E: cholesterol transport protein with expanding role in cell biology. Science.;  ; :
- Wilson PWF, Myers RH, Larson MG, Ordovas JM, Wolf PA, Schaefer EJ. Apolipoprotein E alleles, dyslipidemia and coronary heart disease: the Framingham Offspring Study. JAMA.;  ; :
- Cauley JA, Eichner JE, Kamboh MI, Ferrell RE, Kuller LH. Apo E allele frequencies in younger (age ) vs. older (age ) women. Genet Epidemiol.;  ; :
- Corder EH, Lannfelt L, Viitanen M, et al. Apolipoprotein E genotype determines survival in the oldest old ( years or older) who have good cognition. Arch Neurol.;  ; :
- Davignon J, Gregg RE, Sing CF. Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and atherosclerosis. ArteriosclerosisI'm sorry, there is no text enclosed in ``` ```. Please provide the text that needs to be proofread and improved.