4q25, Microsomal Transfer Protein and Human Longevity: Novel Data and a Meta-Analysis of Association Studies

Marian Beekman, Gerard Jan Blauw, Jeanine J. Houwing-Duistermaat, Bernd W. Brandt, Rudi G. J. Westendorp, and P. Eline Slagboom

1 Molecular Epidemiology, 2 Gerontology and Geriatrics, Department of General Internal Medicine, and 3 Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands.

Recently, chromosome 4q25 was linked to exceptional human longevity, and a haplotype of the positional candidate microsomal transfer protein (MTP) gene was associated with the phenotype in U.S. Caucasians. We investigated whether linkage to 4q25 could be detected in 164 nonagenarian sibships of the Leiden Longevity Study. Additionally, we compared the MTP 493G/T and Q95H allele and haplotype frequencies in the Leiden Longevity Study (379 nonagenarians, 525 of their offspring, and 251 partners of their offspring) and in the Leiden 85-Plus Study (655 octogenarians and 244 young controls). The latter study population was followed for at least 7 years, providing the opportunity to perform prospective analyses using longitudinal data. We found no evidence for linkage at 4q25 or association of the MTP locus with longevity in nonagenarian individuals. Meta-analyses of all previous studies implied that the association in U.S. Caucasians may have its source in admixture of the U.S. control population rather than in the genetic effect of the locus on exceptional longevity.

Long-lived sibling pairs represent the extreme tail of the distribution of human lifespan; they have a history of aging slowly and either markedly delay or escape age-associated diseases. Influencing human lifespan and reaching old age in good health remains a wish for many people. Human variation in lifespan is influenced by three main factors: (i) unique environmental factors (e.g., an individual's diet or hazardous line of work); (ii) familial environmental factors (e.g., familial socioeconomic status); and (iii) genetic factors (e.g., genetic susceptibility to cancer). Environmental factors are hard to study in humans. Current genetic research on longevity aims to identify the genes involved in the ability to become long-lived from the perspective that such genes may indicate the major relevant pathways of human lifespan regulation. Evidence for the inheritance of longevity was provided by the finding that siblings of centenarians have a much higher chance of reaching the age of 100 years than do siblings of controls from the same birth cohort. Furthermore, the study of the comprehensive population-based genealogy database of the Icelandic population shows that a clear familial component is present in longevity. This hereditary component could represent shared environmental factors as well as shared genetic factors. From twin studies, it was estimated that approximately 25% of the variation in lifespan is attributable to genetic variation. However, the genetic basis of the inherited component of longevity still remains to be elucidated.

Because the 4q25 locus was also suggestively linked to healthy aging in a small study of 70-year-old U.S. male veterans, it can be questioned whether this locus is of importance only for attaining the most exceptional longevity. The search for genes having a major influence on longevity could be started by performing a genome scan. We therefore performed linkage analysis in the chromosome 4q25 linkage region in 379 nonagenarian participants belonging to 164 sibships from the Leiden Longevity Study. Recently, we have reported excessive survival in three generations of relatives of these nonagenarian sibling pairs, demonstrating that our selection criteria result in individuals carrying familial longevity effects. Additionally, we performed association analysis of the two-SNP haplotype of the MTP gene in the nonagenarian sib pairs, the offspring of these sib pairs (assuming that they are predisposed to be long-lived), and the partners of the offspring (assuming that they represent the general population). Furthermore, we investigated the first and second cohorts of the prospective population-based Leiden 85-Plus Study for association with the two-SNP haplotype of the MTP gene. Association of the two MTP SNPs was tested cross-sectionally by comparing allele frequencies in the octogenarians with those in a young control group from the same Leiden area, as well as prospectively by testing (using the follow-up data) the effects of the MTP genotypes on survival after the age of 85. Finally, we performed a meta-analysis of all known data on the MTP T-Q haplotype and longevity to estimate the odds ratio of this putative risk haplotype on survival in Caucasian populations.

Participants: Leiden Longevity Study

The individuals investigated in the present study participate in the ongoing Leiden Longevity Study. Families participating in the Leused to represent the previously associated haplotype. The haplotype frequencies did not differ significantly between the case and control groups in the Leiden Longevity Study or in the Leiden 85-Plus Study. Sex-specific analyses also did not reveal any association of these polymorphisms. 

In summary, this study examined the association of MTP gene polymorphisms with longevity in two Dutch populations. The study found no significant association between the MTP gene polymorphisms and longevity in either population. The study used rigorous genotyping methods and adhered to ethical guidelines for research involving human subjects. The results suggest that other genetic or environmental factors may play a stronger role in determining longevity in these populations.population for their analysis, which might have reduced the impact of population stratification. However, the absence of association in our study and in other European studies suggests that the MTP gene may not play a significant role in human longevity in European populations. 

In conclusion, our study did not provide evidence for linkage or association of the MTP gene with nonagenarian longevity in the Dutch population. The absence of association in our study and in other European studies suggests that the genetic determinants of longevity may differ among populations. Further studies are needed to identify other genetic determinants of human longevity.each (non-members).

Individuals, and they proactively matched the controls to the long-lived cases using the genotypes of 60 random SNPs. However, moderate levels of stratification may remain undetected when a small number of SNPs (50-100) are investigated (35). This implies that even after proactively matching, residual population stratification may still have been present in the U.S. control dataset (36). Because our meta-analysis including the U.S. proactively matched sample showed that this putative MTP risk haplotype has no effect on human longevity in Caucasian populations, we conclude that it is more likely that the association found by Geesaman and colleagues has its source in the stratification of (especially) the control group of the U.S. population rather than in the genetic effect of the locus on exceptional longevity.

Considering the absence of linkage in our study, we find it unlikely that chromosome 4q25 harbors a gene explaining the familial effects on Dutch nonagenarian longevity. Furthermore, the current evidence does not support the MTP gene at chromosome 4q25 to be the major longevity gene explaining the previously detected linkage to exceptional longevity.

Figure 2. Kaplan-Meier survival curves per genotype in the two combined cohorts of the Leiden 85-Plus Study for the (cid:1)493G/T and Q95H microsomal transfer protein (MTP) gene single-nucleotide proteins (SNPs). Because the first cohort of the Leiden 85-Plus study was followed for 14 years and the second cohort for 7 years, we were also able to analyze the effect of the MTP SNPs prospectively. None of the genotypes of the (cid:1)493G/T or Q95H MTP SNPs showed an effect on either overall mortality or on specific causes of death (such as cardiovascular disease, which would be the most likely cause of death when MTP would have an effect on mortality). This result is in accordance with the Danish longitudinal results (29).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This study is supported by a grant from Innovation Oriented research Program IOP on Genomics (SenterNovem; IGE01014) and by the Centre for Medical Systems Biology (CMSB), a center of excellence approved by The Netherlands Genomics Initiative/Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO). We appreciate the great effort of Michiel Leijnen and J. Kate van Duijn in genotyping the microsatellite markers and the MTP SNPs in samples of the Leiden Longevity Study and the two cohorts of the Leiden 85-Plus Study. We thank Bas Heijmans for his inspiring comments.

To deal with the discrepancies reported in the literature, we performed a meta-analysis on all published data on the association of the MTP T-Q haplotype and longevity. The meta-analysis including the first and second tier of the U.S. samples showed significant heterogeneity. When, however, the U.S. proactively matched cases and controls were addressed, correspondence to Marian Beekman, PhD, Leiden University Medical Center, Section of Molecular Epidemiology, P.O. Box 9503, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands. E-mail: M.Beekman@LUMC.nl US proactively matched France Germany Denmark Leiden Longevity Leiden 85-plus Pooled Odds Ratio 0.6T08 1.0 Odds Ratio from http://biomedgerontology.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on June 6, 2016 Figure 3. Meta-analysis of the effects of the microsomal transfer protein (MTP) gene T-Q haplotype on longevity. The size of the black square indicates the size of the study.

Borradaile NM, de Dreu LE, Barrett PH, Behrsin CD, Huff MW. Hepatocyte ap-containing lipoprotein secretion is decreased by the grapefruit flavonoid, naringenin, via inhibition of MTP-mediated microsomal triglyceride accumulation. Biochemistry. ; : Talmud PJ, Palmen J, Miller G, Humphries SE. Effect of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein gene variants (-G.T, Q.H and H.Q) on plasma lipid levels in healthy middle-aged UK men. Ann Hum Genet. ; : Karpe F, Lundahl B, Ehrenborg E, Eriksson P, Hamsten A. A common functional polymorphism in the promoter region of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein gene influences plasma LDL levels. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. ; : St Pierre J, Lemieux I, Miller-Felix I, et al. Visceral obesity and hyperinsulinemia modulate the impact of the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein -G/T polymorphism on plasma lipopEach (non-member).