Maurizio Cardelli, Francesca Marchegiani, Luca Cavallone, Fabiola Olivieri, Simona Giovagnetti, Elena Mugianesi, Raffaella Moresi, Rosamaria Lisa, and Claudio Franceschi conducted a study to identify a locus associated with human longevity in one of the chromosomal regions with the highest density of Alu elements, in 1p35. They identified a (TG)n microsatellite in the YTHDF2 gene by characterizing an anonymous marker detectable through inter-Alu fingerprinting. This marker previously evidenced an increased homozygosity in centenarians. After genotyping 412 participants of different ages, including 137 centenarians, they confirmed the increased homozygosity in centenarians at this locus and observed a concomitant increase in the frequency of the most frequent allele and corresponding homozygous genotype. The same genotype was associated with increased YTHDF2 messenger RNA levels in immortalized lymphocytes. Finally, YTHDF2 messenger RNA was mainly expressed in testis and placenta. The data suggest a possible role of this locus in human longevity.

Alu repetitive elements are present on all human chromosomes and have more than one million copies. They are the most abundant human SINEs (Short Interspersed Nuclear Elements) and transcribed by RNA polymerase III. Alu-rich genomic regions are considered potentially unstable due to unequal recombination events. Alu density positively correlates with gene density and is highly clustered near genes involved in metabolism, transport, and signaling processes.

The authors used an Alu-based DNA fingerprinting method to screen multiple loci in peculiar genomic regions particularly rich in Alu sequences. The method amplifies DNA fragments located between two closely spaced (usually no more than 1 kb) Alu sequences with opposite orientation, which occurs most frequently in Alu-rich genomic regions.

The aims of the present work were to identify and characterize the genomic locus corresponding to the anonymous QM-376-400 inter-Alu marker, previously reported to show an increased homozygosity in centenarians. They wanted to assess the existence of a genotype longevity association at this locus in a new, independent set of very old participants (centenarians) and younger controls. They also collected preliminary information about the functional role of the genetic variants of this locus eventually associated with longevity.

The PCR assay used primers R12A/267 labeled with tetrachlorofluorescein (TET), and R14B/264 labeled with 6-carboxyfluorescein (6-FAM); total reaction volume 50 ll, genomic DNA template 100 ng; 27 PCR cycles of 948C denaturation, 508C annealing, 728C extension. Capillary electrophoresis evidenced, in the resulting inter-Alu pattern, the presence of a 384 bp fragment corresponding to an allele of the QM 376-400 polymorphism. An aliquot of the PCR product was subjected to electrophoresis on a 1.5% agarose gel. The gel slice corresponding to an estimated length of 350-400 bp was cut, and the DNA was eluted and analyzed through capillary electrophoresis to confirm the presence and purity of the 384 bp fragment.

DNA was extracted from blood samples following standard procedures. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were obtained from some samples. Peripheral blood mononuclear cell isolation, culture, and B-lymphocyte immortalization were performed as previously described. After immortalization, cells were harvested and frozen in liquid nitrogen two months later.

For the analysis of YTHDF2 messenger RNA expression in different tissues, the Human MTC Panel I and Human MTC Panel II were used. They consist of panels of first-strand complementary DNA preparations from different tissues and/or organs, pooled from different individuals.ages 20-28 years; small intestine without mucosal lining, from 32 male/female Caucasians, ages 15-57 years; colon with mucosal lining, from 20 male/female Caucasians, ages 17-76 years; and leukocyte, peripheral blood, from 550 male/female Caucasians, ages 18-40 years. Analysis of Alu Density and Gene Density corresponding chromosomal positions) are referred to as the Human July 2003-hg16 assembly, available at the UCSC website. The detailed analysis of repetitive element composition of the genomic sequence corresponding to the QM376-400 DNA fragment and to the surrounding portion of the YTHDF2 fourth intron (chr. 1: 28,773,429-28,775,861) was performed using the Censor program (27) and the Repbase database of repetitive elements (28). The Alu density in a 2.6 Mb genomic region including the YTHDF2 gene (chr. 1: 27,500,001-30,100,000) was calculated in 100 kb intervals by means of the Repeat Masker program (http://www.repeatmasker.org). Gene density was calculated in a 1.6 Mb region (chr. 1: 27,600,002-29,200,000) based on the RefSeq Genes track (29), available at the UCSC website. To evaluate the Alu density in the whole genome, data about the position and length of all the Alu sequences identified in the human genome were downloaded from the UCSC website (Repeat Masker analysis on the Jul 2003 assembly) and analyzed. The Alu density was calculated in non-overlapping 1 Mb windows on each chromosome. Intervals including more than 0.4 Mb of sequencing gaps were not considered in the analysis. Primers for the specific amplification of the YTHDF2 intron 4 microsatellite polymorphic locus were YTHDF2 I.F. (5'-GAAGGACCTATCAGAGGCAGTTTT-3') and YTHDF2 I.R. (5'-TTGCAGTGAGCCAAGATA-3'), designed using Primer3 software (30). The first primer was labeled with HEX (hexachlorofluorescein) fluorochrome. PCR reagents and buffers were: 10 pmol each primer, 200 uM each deoxynucleotide, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris HCl pH 8.3, 1.5 mM Mg2+, 1 unit of Taq DNA polymerase (Eppendorf). PCR was performed on an Applied Biosystems 9700 thermal cycler, with predenaturation at 94°C for 4 minutes and 33 amplification cycles as follows: 94°C for 45 seconds; 60°C for 45 seconds; 72°C for 40 seconds; and final extension at 72°C for 7 minutes. PCR products were separated and analyzed by capillary electrophoresis on an ABI/Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). Six PCR fragments resulting from the amplification of different genomic DNA samples were sequenced, using the same protocols and materials reported above. YTHDF2 I.F. and YTHDF2 I.R. were respectively used as primers for sequencing reactions. A comparative Ct (threshold cycle) method was used to determine gene expression (31,32). In the real-time PCR assay on cDNA obtained from immortalized lymphocytes, the relative abundance of YTHDF2 cDNA versus the cDNA of the housekeeping gene ACTB was expressed as [(cDNA)YTHDF2/(cDNA)ACTB] ratio of each sample, normalized by the [(cDNA)YTHDF2/(cDNA)ACTB] ratio of a control sample (calibrator). The normalized ratio was calculated taking into account the different PCR efficiencies for target and reference amplification (32). For cDNA samples from human tissues (MTC Panels I and II), two housekeeping genes were used: ACTB and GAPD. For each tissue obtained, two different values for YTHDF2 expression were normalized against ACTB or GAPD, respectively: YTHDF2 expression normalized against that of the two housekeeping genes was given by the geometric mean of the two values in each sample (33). Intra-assay and inter-assay coefficients of variation were 16.1% and 24.4%, calculated repeating some samples in the same assay and in different assays, respectively. Reverse Transcription and Real-Time PCR The total RNA of immortalized lymphocytes derived from 51 participants (35 centenarians and 16 young individuals) was reverse transcribed with M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Ambion,As expected, the cloned QM376-400 fragment is flanked by two Alu sequences positioned in inverted orientation: an Alu Sx of 302 bp and an Alu Y of 278 bp. The tail of Alu Y is followed by the (TG)n microsatellite. The remaining part of the sequence consists of a 290 bp portion of a MER element (medium reiterated frequency repeat) (34,35) that, based on the comparison with the Repbase database of repetitive elements (28), is a Golem-B/MER7B type DNA nonautonomous transposon. The region surrounding the locus is almost entirely constituted, for roughly 2.5 kb, by three fragments of a MER transposon separated by intervening Alu elements. The reciprocal positions of these repetitive elements could be explained assuming that, in the evolutionary history of the locus, an ancient MER transposon became the target for successive insertions of new elements.

The results showed that the gene is included in a 1.6 Mb region (Figure 1, chr. 1: 27,600,001-29,200,000) with a very high Alu density (ranging from 27% to 51%). This 1.6 Mb Alu-rich domain is also characterized by high gene density, resulting in 61.4% being made up of exons and introns (the genomic average is 34.3%), with relatively short intergenic sequences. In particular, the 500 kb region (chr. 1: 28,517,396-29,017,396) surrounding YTHDF2 contains nine different protein coding genes (CHC1, SECP43, AF277181, MGC45806, TAF12, GMEB1, YTHDF2, OPRD1, EPB41), most of which are putatively involved in signal transduction, gene expression regulation, and cell division.

To evaluate if the high Alu density observed in this genomic region had to be considered exceptional in the context of the whole genome, Alu density was calculated in non-overlapping 1 Mb windows on each chromosome. The portion of chromosome 1 including YTHDF2 (chr. 1: 28,000,000-28,999,999) resulted among the only four genomic regions of this length (or longer) with an Alu density above 40% (the others are chr. 7: 73,000,000-74,999,999, chr. 19: 10,000,000-10,999,999, and chr. 19: 17,000,000-17,999,999, on 7q11.23, 19p13.2 and 19p13.11 respectively). These four genomic regions with very high Alu density represent only 0.17% of the genome. The large majority (about two-thirds) of the genome has an Alu content at least four times lower below 12% (Figure 2).

The YTHDF2 gene codes for a protein of 579 amino acids (Swiss-Prot accession no. Q9Y5A9; synonyms: lymphocytic leukemia-associated antigen KW-14). A BLAST analysis conducted comparing the YTHDF2 mRNA reference sequence (GenBank accession no. NM_016258) with the human genome sequence revealed that the YTHDF2 gene spans about 32 kilobases and is composed of five exons.

Extensive analysis conducted on publicly available genomic databases and using sequence analysis tools and in particular a BLAST search (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST) and Clustal W multialignment (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw) evidenced that YTHDF2 belongs to a gene family that also includes YTHDF1 on chromosome 20 and YTHDF3 on chromosome 8. In fact, the three genes share a structure composed of five exons of similar length and high similarity at cDNA and protein sequence level (data not shown). The search in the Protein Family Database showed the presence of a YTH domain (36) in the protein sequences (in position 457-547 on the YTHDF2 protein). Consequently, given that these three genes were previously lacking an official nomenclature, we proposed to the Human Genome Organization (HUGO) Gene Nomenclature Committee the above-reported gene names (YTHDF1, YTH domain family 1; YTHDF2, YTH domain family 2; and YTHDF3, YTH domain family 3) as official symbols and names, and this proposal was accepted.

A protein-translated sequence tblastn analysis (available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST) conducted on public databases collecting cDNA anda novel and interesting avenue for future research. The present study provides evidence that the YTHDF2 (TG)12-27 locus may be involved in human longevity, possibly through its role in mRNA processing and regulation. The association of homozygosity at this locus with longevity warrants further investigation, particularly in larger cohort studies and in different populations. The characterization of the molecular mechanisms underlying this association may provide new insights into the biology of aging and longevity.An intriguing hypothesis. In fact, the inverse correlation of longevity and reproductive success is a fundamental assumption of the disposable soma theory (47-49): This prediction has been confirmed in model systems (50), and positive evidence in humans has also been reported (51). The trade-off between fertility and longevity often seems to imply genes involved in carbohydrate homeostasis (52-55). In this regard, it is interesting to note that the YTHDF2 gene is reported to be regulated by high glucose concentration (see GenBank accession no. AF192968). Thus, it could be worthwhile to test the hypothesis of a possible role of YTHDF2 in insulin/longevity-associated variants of this polymorphism. We analyzed the expression of the YTHDF2 gene in cells having different genotypes to investigate its possible association with longevity. In particular, we assessed, by relative quantitative real-time PCR, the YTHDF2 mRNA level in cultured cell lines derived from 10 individuals having the 15-15 genotype and from 41 individuals having different genotypes. Cell lines were Epstein-Barr Virus-immortalized B lymphocytes, which have been proved to be a reliable model in correlating genotype and gene expression (25,40). The results showed that cell lines with the 15-15 genotype have, on average, more than two times higher levels of YTHDF2 mRNA expression in comparison with cell lines with other genotypes. This finding suggests the presence of different functional variants of the YTHDF2 gene, where the 15 allele is probably associated with a variant characterized by a higher expression level, at least in the described experimental conditions. These data are compatible with the hypothesis that the alleles at this locus could be in linkage disequilibrium with still unidentified genetic variants in the promoter or in other regulatory sites, but a direct influence of YTHDF2(TG)12-27 polymorphism itself on gene transcription can not be excluded. Indeed, it is not uncommon to find enhancers and regulatory sites in introns, and polymorphic microsatellites can influence gene expression by modifying the distance between specific regulatory sites (41), or by inducing the DNA to assume left-handed helical structures (Z-DNA) (42,43).

The above-described peculiar expression pattern in normal tissues and of an antigenic activity in cancer cells is typical of a class of genes mainly regulated by epigenetic modifications, the so-called cancer-testis antigens (CT antigens) (56,57). They are a heterogeneous group of proteins, presumably involved in cell-cycle regulation or transcriptional control (58), present as antigens in various cancer cells and predominantly expressed in testis, placenta, and/or ovary. CT genes are often highly expressed in the pancreas (59), which noticeably was the third sample showing a relatively high YTHDF2 expression in our RTPCR assay.

The possible association between YTHDF2 intron 4 microsatellite polymorphism and longevity can be inferred by the genomic background surrounding the locus. The portion of the 1p35 chromosomal region around YTHDF2 is rich with genes (mostly involved in signal transduction, gene expression regulation, and cell division); the possibility of a linkage disequilibrium between the considered (TG)n microsatellite and other functional polymorphisms in nearby genes should be carefully tested in future studies. Finally, it is important to remark that this locus lies in a genomic region with rare and atypical features. This polymorphism was originally identified through the analysis of anonymous inter-Alu sequences much shorter than the 3 kb average (60) genomic inter-Alu distance, and the reasonable expectation was to find it located in a genomic region with higher than average Alu density. Indeed, this locus is situated in a wide Alu-rich domain (1.6 Mb), and the 1 Mb region containing the YTHDF2 gene is the portion of chromosome 1 with the highest content of Alu elements (>40% of the sequence in this chromosomal region). In the whole genome, such a high Alu density is present in only four regions (of 1 Mb or more) which account for 0.17% of the human genome, whereas two-thirds of the genome show an Alu content about four times lower. This peculiarity in the genomic composition might affect the expression of YTHDF2 and other genes in the region, rendering it sensitive to Alu-induced epigenetic effects (18,23). Moreover, the very high Alu density could induce genomic instability, in germline as well as in somatic cells, due to unequal recombination events (18-20). Indeed, 1p35 has been described as one of the chromosomal sites most often involved in genomic instability in a variety of malignancies (61-63).

References:
De Benedictis G, Falcone E, Rose G, et al. DNA multiallelicHaplogroup J with longevity is population-specific. Eur J Hum Genet. ; : Rea IM, McKeown PP, Master D, et al. Paraoxonase polymorphisms PON1 and PON2 and longevity in Italian centenarians and Irish nonagenarians. A pooled analysis. Exp Gerontol. ; : Chondrogianni N, de CM Simoes D, Franceschi C, Gonos ES. Cloning of differentially expressed genes in skin fibroblasts from centenarians. Biogerontology. ; : Puca AA, Daly MJ, Brewster SJ, et al. A genome-wide scan for linkage to human exceptional longevity identifies a locus on chromosome 4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. ; : Nebel A, Schreiber S. GEHAthe pan-European Genetics of Healthy Aging project. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ. ; : Bonafe M, Cardelli M, Marchegiani F, et al. Increase of homozygosity in centenarians revealed by a new inter-Alu PCR technique. Exp Gerontol. ; : Lander ES, Linton LM, Birren B, et al. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome. Nature. ; : Schmid CW. Does SINE evolution preclude Alu function? Nucleic Acids Res. ; : Deininger PL, Batzer MA. Alu repeats and human disease. Mol Genet Metab. ; : Deininger PL, Batzer MA. Mammalian retroelements. Genome Res. ; : Grover D, Mukerji M, Bhatnagar P, Kannan K, Brahmachari SK. Alu repeat analysis in the complete human genome: trends and variations with respect to genomic composition. Bioinformatics. ; : Grover D, Majumder PP, Rao CB, Brahmachari SK, Mukerji M. Nonrandom distribution of Alu elements in genes of various functional categories: insight from analysis of human chromosomes 21 and 22. Mol Biol Evol. ; : Greally JM. Short interspersed transposable elements (SINEs) are excluded from imprinted regions in the human genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. ; : Franceschi C, Motta L, Valensin S, et al. Do men and women follow different trajectories to reach extreme longevity? Italian Multicenter Study on Centenarians (IMUSCE). Aging (Milano). ; : 

Conclusion
This is the first study that provides evidence of an association of a new gene, i.e., YTHDF2, with human longevity. This gene has several unexpected peculiarities that are of potential interest, particularly its chromosomal context constituted by one of the regions with the highest content of Alu sequences, its high expression in reproductive organs and in highly proliferating tissues, and its possible involvement in glucose metabolism. Future studies should check the possibility that YTHDF2 is a cell-cycle regulator gene widely subjected to epigenetic regulation and dysregulation, in a chromosomal region potentially susceptible to epigenetic modification during life, as well as the possibility of involvement in the insulin-like growth factor I/insulin signaling pathway and in the trade-off between longevity and fertility.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by grants from the Italian Ministry of Health, Progetto Finalizzato 2002 Studio Multicentrico sui Determinanti Genetici e non Genetici di Salute nellEta` Avanzata; European Union Grants GEHA (LSHM-CT-2004-503270) and FP6 EU Project T-CIA; Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research PRIN 2003; Fondi Strutturali Obiettivo 2 and the PRRIITT Program of the Emilia-Romagna Region; and by University of Bologna Roberto Pallotti Legacy for Cancer Research. We thank Dr. Hester Mary Wain, of the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee, for the helpful collaboration in the choice of gene names and symbols of YTH Domain Family members.

Address correspondence to Maurizio Cardelli, PhD, Department Gerontological Research, Italian National Research Center on (I.N.R.C.A), Via Birarelli 8, 60100 Ancona, Italy. Email: libero.it

factor YTB in nuclear dots is regulated by the Src family kinase p (fyn). Mol Biol Cell. ; : Scanlan MJ, Gordan JD, Williamson B, et al. Antigens recognized by autologous antibody in patients with renal-cell carcinoma. Int J Cancer. ; : Krackhardt AM, Witzens M, Harig S, et al. Identification of tumor-associated antigens in chronic lymphocytic leukemia by SEREX. Blood. ; : Kirkwood TB. Evolution ofThere is no text to process. "Smith, PhD" is a proper name and title.