Genetic and Environmental Determinants of Healthy Aging: Prospective Study of High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol, Cholesteryl Ester Transfer Protein Gene Variants, and Healthy Aging in Very Old Japanese-American Men.

Authors: Tanya A. Koropatnick, Jennifer Kimbell, Randi Chen, John S. Grove, Timothy A. Donlon, Kamal H. Masaki, Beatriz L. Rodriguez, Bradley J. Willcox, Katsuhiko Yano, and J. David Curb.

Affiliations: 1 Pacific Health Research Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii; 2 John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii at Manoa; 3 Kuakini Medical Center, Honolulu, Hawaii.

Background: High-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) gene deficiency mutations that increase HDL-C levels have been associated with exceptional longevity. However, a recent clinical trial of a promising CETP inhibitor that markedly increases HDL-C was terminated due to increased mortality. In light of this controversy, we examined the relationship among HDL-C, CETP mutations, and longevity phenotypes in the long-lived Japanese-American men of the Honolulu Heart Program (HHP).

Methods: Japanese-American men (n=3562) were followed for up to 8 years, from an average age of 78 to an average age of 84 (maximum age 99), or until death. Total mortality, cause-specific mortality, and healthy survival were evaluated for associations with HDL-C level and CETP genetic variants common in the Japanese population (D442G and Int 14A).

Results: HDL-C was negatively associated with cardiovascular disease (CVD) mortality (p < .002) but not related to non-CVD (p < .147) or total (p < .547) mortality after adjustment for common risk factors. There was a trend for lower mortality for the men with the Int 14A variant. These men also had higher HDL-C levels (p=.047) and were significantly more likely to be healthy survivors (absence of six major age-related diseases and high physical/cognitive function) beyond the age of 90 years (p < .005).

Conclusions: Low HDL-C level is a risk factor for CVD mortality in elderly Japanese-American men. High HDL-C and the Int 14A variant of the CETP gene may increase the odds for healthy aging.

Key Words: High-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), Cholesteryl ester transfer protein, Americans, Cardiovascular disease, Longevity, Healthy aging.

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a leading cause of death in the Western world, and some data suggest that individuals gifted with exceptional longevity are able to avoid CVD and other major age-associated diseases (1,2). Despite efforts to reduce CVD risk factors, such as cholesterol, smoking, and hypertension, coronary heart disease (CHD)-related mortality remains much higher in the United States than in some non-Western countries such as Japan, whose population is among the longest-lived and healthiest in the world (3).

Recent findings suggest that a favorable lipoprotein profile, including high levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and low levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), is predictive of exceptional longevity, likely due in part to a reduction in CVD risk (4). Certain variants in genes involved in lipoprotein metabolism have also been linked to exceptional longevity (4-6). One of these is the cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) gene, which codes for a carrier in reverse cholesterol transport that mediates the transfer of cholesteryl esters from HDL to LDLs and triglyceride (TG)-rich lipoproteins (7). Several naturally occurring mutations in the CETP gene lead to dramatic reductions in plasma CETP levels and a significant increase in HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) levels. The most common missense variation (I405V) is known to be over-represented in Ashkenazi Jewish centenarians and their offspring (4). Centenarians and their offspring had an approximate 2- to 3-fold increased frequency of homozygosity for the codon 405 isoleucine to valine (I405V) gene variant of CETP (VV genotype).

Given that a reduction in CETP level leads to dramatic increases in HDL-C, a new class of CETP inhibitor drugs was developed for use in combination with LDL-C-lowering statins to improve lipoprotein profiles and decrease CVD risk in patients with dyslipidemia (8). However, in late 2006, a clinical trial of the CETP inhibitor torcetrapib was halted due to increased mortality in persons taking the drug (9).30.27 108.42 6 32.29 101.24 6 29.22, .0001 HDL-C (mg/dL) 49.68 6 12.36 51.08 6 13.6 52.18 6 14.11 51.73 6 13.49 .0034 HDL-C, 60 mg/dL, % 20, 23, 26, and 23 respectively (p = .1226) (source: http://biomedgerontology.oxfordjournals.org/ accessed on March 20, 2016). NA stands for not applicable; HHP stands for Honolulu Heart Program; BMI stands for body mass index; BP stands for blood pressure; TG stands for triglycerides; LDL-C stands for low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; HDL-C stands for high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.

The lipids were separated by precipitation with dextran sulfate and magnesium chloride (18), and measured using an Olympus Demand System (Olympus Corp., Lake Success, NY). DNA was obtained from white blood cells separated from plasma samples. The Int14A and D442G variants (rs5742907 and rs2303790, respectively) in the CETP gene were identified using polymerase chain reaction amplification and primer-specific restriction map modification as previously described (19).

No association was found between age and the percentage of participants with HDL-C >60 mg/dL. During the eight-year follow-up, there were a total of 1080 deaths from all causes, including 349 CVD deaths. Higher levels of HDL-C (>60 mg/dL) were significantly associated with a lower rate of CVD mortality after adjustment for age (Table 2). Non-CVD deaths were positively associated with higher levels of HDL-C after age adjustment (p = .0228). However, with adjustments for additional common risk factors (age, smoking, hypertension, alcohol intake, BMI, total cholesterol, diabetes, and physical activity index), the relative risk of non-CVD deaths was no longer associated with HDL-C levels (Table 3). The relative risk of CVD deaths remained strongly associated (p = .002) with HDL-C level after the same adjustments. Higher HDL-C levels were associated with healthy aging in participants older than 90 years (p = .047; Table 4).

Statistical methods used to calculate age group and the test of trends for age were calculated using the General Linear Model. The age-specific and age-adjusted rates of total mortality, CVD deaths, and other deaths for HDL-C levels and CETP variants were calculated in person-years. The differences between rates were tested using Cox's proportional hazard model, which was also used to estimate the relative risk for the linear effects of HDL-C on total and cause-specific mortalities after adjusting for age, smoking, hypertension, alcohol intake, BMI, cholesterol level, diabetes, and physical activity index. Age-adjusted mean levels of HDL and frequencies of the Int14A variant by healthy aging status were estimated using analysis of covariance. Fisher's exact test was used to compare proportions of healthy survivors across Int14A genotypes. Statistical software SAS (version 9; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) was used in the statistical analysis.

Out of the 3448 men genotyped for CETP, 17 had the Int14A mutation. Although a trend suggested decreased all-cause mortality for men with the Int14A variant compared to those without the variant, the association failed to reach statistical significance (p = .20; Figure 1), possibly due to the small number of participants which provided only 13.9% power to detect a difference of this magnitude at the 5% level. However, of men who were considered healthy at baseline (free of six major chronic diseases and with high physical/cognitive function; n = 1495), those who possessed at least one copy of the Int14A variant (n = 9) were significantly more likely to remain healthy until at least 90 years of age (p = .025; Table 4). One hundred seventy-three men had the D442G missense mutation, but no association was found between this variant and mortality (p = .38).

BMI, alcohol consumption, smoking, physical activity index, fasting serum glucose, total cholesterol, and TG levels had significant negative associations with age (Table 1). Systolic BP levels increased significantly (p < .0001) with increasing age, but no trend was found relating age to hypertension. HDL-C levels increased significantly (p = .0034) with age. Of the 3562 participants analyzed for HDL-C, 22.7% had levels >60 mg/dL.

A strong inverse association exists between blood levels of HDL-C and theThe text is already properly formatted and free of spelling errors, duplicated letters, words or phrases. However, there are some minor grammatical errors that need to be corrected to improve readability and coherence. Here is the processed text with the suggested corrections:

CETP. However, it raises the important issue of assessing multiple age-related endpoints, including all-cause mortality. Disadvantages, as mentioned, include the small numbers of participants with one or more copies of the CETP gene variants of interest and limited statistical power. There is also the possibility that the protective effect for healthy aging is a false-positive finding. It should be replicated in other population samples. Another drawback if the finding is confirmed in other populations is that the mechanism may not necessarily be due to the blood level of CETP. Further work should attempt to correlate blood levels of CETP with healthy aging. Many such genetic findings may be population-specific. For example, the gene variants that we studied are prevalent in 2%-7% of the Japanese population (11) but are rare in other populations. Finally, another limitation of this study is that we are studying elderly individuals who have already survived, and survival factors may differ at younger ages. From http://biomedgerontology.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on March 20, 2016.

Despite these hypothetical explanations for the contradictory findings, the reasons for such conflicting results are perplexing. It is possible that the focus on CETP inhibition leading to higher total plasma HDL levels and larger HDL particle size, the two most commonly touted protective mechanisms, may be overly simplistic. Recent work suggests that CETP inhibition does more than just raise HDL or alter HDL particle size. CETP also plays an important role as a modulator of HDL metabolism and affects its composition and properties (31). That is, CETP can alter the distribution and apolipoprotein make-up of HDL particles. Gene variants, such as I405V or Int 14A, which cause CETP deficiency, may cause the apoA-I in these particles to associate with apoA-II and other HDL apolipoproteins (except apoA-IV) forming HDL that differs in apolipoprotein composition and function.

The role of CETP as a longevity gene (a gene that enhances survival to exceptional old age) has also been called into question, and this area clearly requires further study. On the supportive side, a CETP deficiency mutation (I405V) that causes an increase in HDL concentration and larger particle size has been associated with increased odds for exceptional longevity and decreased odds for dementia in studies of Ashkenazi Jewish centenarians and their offspring (4,5). Some long-lived families in Japan also appear to possess a higher prevalence of the Int 14A variant (26), which has similar effects on HDL levels and particle size as the I405V variant. Furthermore, a study of several hundred frail, community-dwelling octogenarians and nonagenarians in Italy also found a protective effect of HDL-C on the risk of all-cause mortality, although the genetic basis of this was not reported (27). These findings suggest that some aspect of the high HDL phenotype may have lifelong protective effects and that this is apparent in multiple ethnic groups. However, until the current study, whether this phenotype is associated with good health in long-lived persons or healthy aging (i.e., low morbidity, high physical and cognitive function as a single phenotype) had not been studied.

Interestingly, some work suggests that heterozygous CETP-deficient patients, who have highly differentiated HDL, especially those with high LpA-I a-1 levels, have more effective reverse cholesterol transport (improved anti-atherogenesis) as compared to homozygotes, who may have very large, undifferentiated HDL particles. Thus CETP heterozygotes may have more effective reverse cholesterol transport and may be at less CVD risk than homozygotes, and we speculate that this might be linked to other phenotypes of healthy aging (32). Therefore, it is plausible that differences in HDL subtype and effectiveness may be one possible explanation for the differential risk seen with different CETP inhibitors and genotypes in clinical and epidemiological studies. These differences might also affect healthy aging and longevity. More research is required in this important area to understand these complexities and to generalize findings between populations.

On the negative side, the epidemiologic data are not universally supportive. For example, prior cross-sectional studies of Japanese and Italian centenarians found that CETP mutations were not associated with exceptional longevity (28,29), and a marked reduction in the prevalence of the Int 14A mutation was found in a small (n = 67) sample of elderly (>80 years) Japanese participants.

Conclusion

The current study adds further epidemiologic support for a role of HDL-C and CETP genotype in an ethnicI'm sorry, but there is no text enclosed in ``` ``` for me to proofread and improve. Can you please provide me with the text you want me to work on?