Adiponectin Levels and Genotype: A Potential Regulator of Lifespan in Humans

Gil Atzmon, Toni I. Pollin, Jill Crandall, Keith Tanner, Clyde B. Schechter, Philipp E. Scherer, Marielisa Rincon, Glenn Siegel, Micol Katz, Richard B. Lipton, Alan R. Shuldiner, and Nir Barzilai

Introduction

Although caloric restriction in numerous models extends life, longevity in humans is suggested to be limited by the increased prevalence of obesity. Adiponectin, a fat-derived peptide, has a protective role against age-related disease and thus is an excellent candidate gene for longevity. We studied adiponectin levels in centenarians (n=118), their offspring (n=228), and unrelated participants aged over 95 (n=78). Adiponectin levels were significantly greater in participants older than 95 years (p<.01), an effect that was independent of sex and body mass index (BMI). Adiponectin levels in the offspring were higher (following adjustment for age, sex, and BMI) compared to controls (p<.02), suggesting that inherited factors play a role in determining adiponectin levels. Over-representation of two common variants in the Adiponectin gene (ADIPOQ) in male long-lived individuals combined with their independent association with elevated plasma adiponectin levels (in men and women) suggests that their presence may promote increased lifespan through the regulation of adiponectin production and/or secretion.

Background

Insulin resistance is an independent risk factor for glucose intolerance and diabetes as well as cardiovascular disease (CVD). Thus, one of the mechanisms underlying protection from these age-related diseases in exceptionally long-lived individuals and their offspring is that those who survive to extreme old age have preserved their insulin sensitivity. Several cross-sectional studies show that adiponectin increases with age. This finding appears paradoxical because normal aging is associated with insulin resistance and increased risk of CVD and suggests that aging may be associated with some degree of adiponectin resistance or possibly that increased adiponectin levels extend lifespan, leading to a selection bias for survival of those with higher adiponectin levels.

Methods

We studied participants at least 95 years old and recruited the offspring of these individuals. We investigated the relationship between adiponectin levels, ADIPOQ genotypes, relevant metabolic phenotypes, and longevity. Identification of genes and biological markers that are conducive to exceptional longevity may provide insights into mechanisms that protect from a number of common diseases and/or slow the biological processes of aging.

Results

Adiponectin, a serum protein expressed and secreted exclusively by adipose tissue, plays a protective role against insulin resistance and atherosclerosis in humans and protects the heart from ischemia-reperfusion injury in an animal model. Adiponectin exerts its favorable effects on insulin sensitivity in vivo through a decrease in hepatic glucose production. Adiponectin's anti-atherosclerotic effects are mediated in part by its anti-inflammatory activity on endothelial cells. Plasma adiponectin concentrations are reduced in obese individuals. Weight loss has been shown to increase adiponectin levels. Lower adiponectin levels are characteristic of insulin-resistant states such as lipoatrophy and type 2 diabetes (T2D) as well as with coronary artery disease.

Conclusion

Adiponectin is an excellent candidate gene for longevity. The study of its levels in centenarians, their offspring, and unrelated participants aged over 95 suggests that inherited factors play a role in determining adiponectin levels. Over-representation of two common variants in ADIPOQ in male long-lived individuals combined with their independent association with elevated plasma adiponectin levels suggests that their presence may promote increased lifespan through the regulation of adiponectin production and/or secretion.text seems to be mostly free of spelling errors, but there are some issues with grammar and punctuation that need to be addressed. Here is the processed text:

Controls examined unadjusted crude data; and (iii) offspring and controls, where crude data were adjusted for age (except age and sex), sex (except sex), and BMI (except age, sex, BMI, and % fat). Examination was performed as previously described (2, 20, 21). The presence of metabolic syndrome was determined using National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP), Adult Treatment Panel III (ATP III) criteria (25). Percentage body fat was determined using bioelectric impedance analysis (BIA), performed with a Tanita BIA body fat analyzer (Body Fat Monitor Scale, BF-625; Tanita Corporation of America Inc., Arlington Heights, IL). BIA is used in many epidemiological studies including the age group of the offspring and controls and has been shown to be a better representative of risks associated with increased fat mass compared to BMI. Therefore, it should be helpful. Associations of adiponectin levels with other variables were estimated using regression on an indicator variable for the group, stratifying for age, sex, and BMI. In defining strata for age, cut points of 65, 70, 75, 80, and 85 years were used (Figure 1). Spearman correlations for BMI, % fat, and age were adjusted for age and sex (except age). Spearman correlations for metabolic syndrome-associated traits (i.e., blood pressure, HDL, LDL, triglycerides, glucose, waist circumference and HDL and LDL particle sizes) were adjusted for age, sex and BMI (Table 2).

The phenotypic characteristics of exceptionally long-lived probands, their offspring, and unrelated controls are shown in Table 1. Adiponectin levels are known to be associated with age and BMI (a surrogate for body fat), and these relationships held in our sample (Figure 1 and Table 2). As previously described (31, 32), women had significantly higher adiponectin levels than did men in the combined sample (15.6 ± 0.49 vs. 11.6 ± 0.58 lg/mL; p < .0001, adjusted for age at recruitment and BMI). Furthermore, adiponectin levels were correlated with some serum lipid levels (Table 2); for example, Spearman correlation coefficients for triglycerides and HDL with adiponectin levels were −0.19 (p = .0005) and 0.23 (p < .0001), respectively. Lipoprotein particle sizes were positively correlated, whereas waist circumference was negatively correlated with adiponectin levels (Table 2). Glucose, LDL levels, and blood pressure showed no significant correlation with adiponectin levels.

Low adiponectin levels have been associated with metabolic syndrome (33); this relationship held in our control and offspring groups. The mean difference in adiponectin levels between persons with and without metabolic syndrome was 3.18 lg/mL (p = .011). This difference was observed in both offspring and controls, and the effect size was similar in each group (p = .56 for interaction effect), suggesting that the biological action of adiponectin to protect from metabolic syndrome is similar in offspring (with higher adjusted adiponectin levels) who are expected to be genetically enriched for longevity compared to controls. The relationship between adiponectin levels and metabolic syndrome was significant in both sexes but stronger among men (women: 13.5 ± 1.2 vs. 16.6 ± 0.6, p = .02; men: 7.7 ± 1.2 vs. 11.5 ± 0.5, p = .004).

Before analysis, genotypes were checked for Mendelian consistency where possible by comparing probands-offspring pairs. Mendelian errors were resolved or removed before analysis. Allele frequencies were calculated by gene counting. All SNPs conformed to Hardy-Weinberg expectations. We evaluated the association between SNP genotype and phenotype (adiponectin levels) under the additive and dominant genetic models using multiple regression. Statistical analyses were performed using Stata 9.2 (Stata Corp., College Station, TX) and SAS 9.1 (Cary, NC).

RESULTS

Controls examined unadjusted crude data; and (iii) offspring and controls, where crude data were adjusted for age (except age and sex), sex (except sex), and BMI (except age, sex, BMI, and % fat). Examination was performed as previously described (2, 20, 21). The presence of metabolic syndrome was determined using National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP), Adult Treatment Panel III (ATP III) criteria (25). Percentage body fat wasJews has yielded interesting findings regarding the role of adiponectin levels and ADIPOQ polymorphisms in this rare phenotype. Our results suggest that higher adiponectin levels may contribute to longevity through its anti-atherogenic and anti-inflammatory effects. We found that offspring of long-lived probands have higher adiponectin levels than spouse controls, supporting a genetic mechanism for exceptional longevity. Two common ADIPOQ polymorphisms were associated with adiponectin levels, with stronger evidence in men. These same polymorphisms were over-represented in exceptionally long-lived men, suggesting that genetic variants in ADIPOQ may contribute to exceptional longevity. However, the association was not significant after statistical adjustment for multiple comparisons. Further longitudinal studies are needed to confirm these findings and determine the role of adiponectin and ADIPOQ polymorphisms in cardiovascular outcomes.The study on Ashkenazi Jews was based on the hypothesis that the characteristics of longevity may be less complex in this relatively homogeneous population. The findings in this population are likely to reflect biologically and genetically relevant pathways present in other populations as well. The relationships observed between adiponectin levels and BMI, sex, and lipoprotein profile are in complete agreement with the findings of others in diverse populations (14). These findings shed light on the biology behind the emerging evidence that human longevity is being threatened by the epidemic of obesity (10). Further mechanistic understanding of the role of adiponectin in promoting longevity may lead to the development of strategies for delaying or preventing age-related diseases. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work has been supported by grants from the Paul Beeson Physician Faculty Scholar in Aging Award, the Ellison Medical Foundation Senior Scholar Award, the National Institutes of Health (R01 AG18728), the General Clinical Research Center (M01-RR12248), the Diabetes Research and Training Center (DK 20541) at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, and the Baltimore VA Geriatric Research and Education Clinical Center. Because we have studied a relatively homogeneous cohort of Ashkenazi Jews residing on the East Coast of the United States, population stratification is an unlikely explanation for the observed associations. Furthermore, the same alleles enriched in male probands were associated with higher adiponectin levels, as previously reported in other populations (13,28). The 2019 single nucleotide deletion is present in the 3' untranslated region and could affect protein expression by altering messenger RNA stability or translational efficiency. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that this and the promoter variant may not be causal but rather in linkage disequilibrium with functional variants. Functional studies will be required to further define the causal role of these variants on adiponectin levels and the longevity phenotype. Since several comparisons were made and the associations are at a modest level of significance, the replication of previous reports of association with adiponectin levels in the same direction (13,28) supports a true effect on adiponectin levels and enrichment in long-lived probands of the rs17300539 G/A-A/A and APM12019 del/del. 

We are indebted to all participants and their families for their commitment and enthusiasm. We are also grateful to the following institutions that assisted in recruitment: The Hebrew Home for the Aging, Riverdale, NY; Kittay House, Bronx, NY; the Hebrew Home Hospital, West Hartford, CT; and the Jewish Home for the Aged, New Haven, CT, all under the aegis of the Association for Jewish Aging Services, Washington, DC. We also thank Sandy Ott for performing the genotype analysis. Drs. Atzmon and Pollin contributed equally to this work. 

CORRESPONDENCE 

Address correspondence to Nir Barzilai, MD, Institute for Aging Research, Belfer Bldg. #701, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461. E-mail: barzilai@aecom.yu.edu 

REFERENCES 

Perls T, Kunkel LM, Puca AA. The genetics of exceptional human longevity. J Mol Neurosci.; : Atzmon G, Schechter C, Greiner W, et al. Clinical phenotype of families with longevity. J Am Geriatr Soc.; : Barbieri M, Rizzo MR, Manzella D, Paolisso G. Age-related insulin resistance: is it an obligatory finding? The lesson from healthy centenarians. Diabetes Metab Res Rev.; : Combs TP, Berg AH, Obici S, Scherer PE, Rossetti L. Endogenous glucose production is inhibited by the adipose-derived protein Acrp J Clin Invest.; : 
We previously reported (20) an increased frequency of the favorable V/V cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP 405 VV) genotype with exceptional longevity. Whereas in the 70-year-old control group, the frequency of the favorable VV genotype was 8%, it was 25% in the 100-year-old group. Shimada K, Miyazaki T, Daida H. Adiponectin and atherosclerotic disease. Clin Chim Acta.; : Okamoto Y, Arita Y, Nishida M, et al. An adipocyte-derived plasma protein, adiponectin, adheres to injured vascular walls. Horm Metab Res.; : Ouchi N, Kihara S, Arita Y, et al. Novel modulator for endothelial adhesion molecules: adipocyte-derived plasma protein adiponectin. Circulation.; : Kubota N, Terauchi Y, Yamauchi T, et al. Disruption of adiponectin causes insulin resistance and neointimal formation. J Biol Chem.; : ShibataR. Warner, PhD.