A Meta-analysis of Four Genome-Wide Association Studies of Survival to Age 90 Years or Older: The Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology Consortium

Anne B. Newman,1,* Stefan Walter,2,3,*, Kathryn L. Lunetta,4,5,* Melissa E. Garcia,6,* P. Eline Slagboom,7 Kaare Christensen,8 Alice M. Arnold,9 Thor Aspelund,10 Yurii S. Aulchenko,2, Emelia J. Benjamin,4,11,12,13 Lene Christiansen,8 Ralph B. D'Agostino Sr.,4,14 Annette L. Fitzpatrick,15 Nora Franceschini,16 Nicole L. Glazer,17,18 Vilmundur Gudnason,10,19 Albert Hofman,2, Robert Kaplan,20 David Karasik,21,22 Margaret Kelly-Hayes,4,23 Douglas P. Kiel,21,22 Lenore J. Launer,6 Kristin D. Marciante,17,18 M. Psaty,15,17-18-25 Fernando Rivadeneira,2-26 Jerome Rotter 27 Sudha Seshadri 23 Albert V. Smith 18 Kent D. Taylor 27 Henning Tiemeier 2-28 Hae-Won Uh 29 Andr G. Uitterlinden 2-26 James W. Vaupel 30 Jeremy Walston 31 Rudi G. J. Westendorp 32 Tamara B. Harris 6,* Thomas Lumley 9,* Cornelia M. van Duijn 2,* and Joanne M. Murabito4-33*

1Cardiovascular Health Study Department of Epidemiology University of Pittsburgh Pennsylvania.
2Rotterdam Study Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and 3Department of Public Health Erasmus Medical
4Framingham Heart Study The National Heart Lung and Blood Institute Massachusetts.
5Framingham Heart Study Department of Biostatistics Boston University School of Public Health Massachusetts.
6Age Gene/Environment Susceptibility-Reykjavik Study (AGES-Reykjavik) Laboratory of Epidemiology Biometry and Demography Intramural Research Program National Institute on Aging Bethesda Maryland.
7Leiden Longevity Study Netherlands Consortium for Healthy Ageing Section of Molecular Epidemiology Leiden University Medical
9Cardiovascular Health Study Department of Biostatistics University of Washington Seattle. Gene/Environment Susceptibility-Reykjavik Study (AGES-Reykjavik) University of Iceland School of Medicine Reykjavik Iceland.
11Framingham Heart Study Department of Cardiology and 12Department of Preventive Medicine Boston University School of Medicine Massachusetts.
19Age Gene/Environment Susceptibility-Reykjavik Study (AGES-Reykjavik) Icelandic Heart Association Iceland. Health Study Department of Epidemiology and Population Health Albert Einstein College of Medicine Bronx New York.
21Framingham Heart Study Hebrew Senior Life Institute for Aging Research Boston Massachusetts.
23Framingham Heart Study Department of Neurology Boston University School of Medicine Massachusetts.
24Age Gene/Environment Susceptibility-Reykjavik Study (AGES-Reykjavik) Laboratory of Neurogenetics Intramural Research Program National Institute on Aging Bethesda Maryland.

Address correspondence to Anne B. Newman, MD, MPH, Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, 130 North Bellefield Avenue, Suite 500, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. Email: newmana@edc.pitt.edu

Background. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) may yield insights into longevity.

Methods. We performed a meta-analysis of GWAS in Caucasians from four prospective cohort studies: the Age, Gene/Environment Susceptibility-Reykjavik Study, the Cardiovascular Health Study, the Framingham Heart Study, and the Rotterdam Study participating in the Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium. Longevity was defined as survival to age 90 years or older (n = 1,836); the comparison group comprised cohort members who died between the ages of 55 and 80 years (n = 1,955). In a second discovery stage, additional genotyping was conducted in the Leiden Longevity Study cohort and the Danish 1905 cohort.

Results. There were 273 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) associations with p < .0001, but none reached the prespecified significance level of 5 x 10^-8. Of the most significant SNPs, 24 were independent signals, and 16 of these SNPs were successfully genotyped in the second discovery stage, with one association for rs9664222, reaching 6.77 x 10^-7 for the combined meta-analysis of CHARGEthat could not be genotyped or imputed in all four CHARGE cohorts, so they were excluded. Of the 22 SNPs selected for genotyping, two could not be genotyped, and four did not pass quality control procedures. Thus, 16 SNPs were analyzed in the second stage. In the Leiden Longevity Study, a total of 950 long-lived proband siblings (mean age 94 years, range 89-104 years), 1,750 offspring (mean age 61 years, range 39-81 years), and 758 partners of offspring (mean age 60 years, range 36-79 years) were included. The additional genotyping of selected SNPs was undertaken in all 950 long-lived probands and compared with the 744 partners of their offspring and an additional 680 blood bank donors (60% men, mean age 31 years, range 18-40 years). All long-lived individuals and comparison groups were from the Leiden area in the Netherlands and of European ancestry.

The study-specific inflation factors (λ) were computed using the set of chi-square statistics used for the meta-analysis for each study to analyze the SNPs. The inflation factor is computed as the median of all chi-square statistics divided by the expected median of the statistics (approximately 0.456) for a chi-square distribution with one degree of freedom. We calculated a meta-analysis odds ratio (OR) for each SNP using a fixed-effects model that combined logistic regression parameters and standard errors across the studies using inverse variance weights. The meta-analysis OR represents the increase in log-odds of surviving to age 90 years or older versus dying between ages 55 and 80 years for each additional copy of the minor allele of the SNP. SNP associations were considered significant on a genome-wide level at p < 5 × 10^-8.

The 16 SNPs in the second discovery phase effort were analyzed in the two study samples using an additive model. The results were added to the previous meta-analysis using a fixed-effects model as described earlier. Finally, using the top 24 results, we conducted a pathway analysis with the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/).

Participants in the Danish 1905 Cohort Survey are from the Danish 1905 birth cohort ascertained in 1998 when they were aged 92-93 years. Of the 3,600 participants alive from that cohort, 2,262 participants enrolled in the study. Participants underwent a home-based interview on health and lifestyle parameters, physical and cognitive tests, and collection of biologic material. The current genetic study comprises a total of 1,644 participants from this survey, mean age 93 years (range 92-93 years), 28% men. A comparison group included 2,007 Caucasians who were twins (one twin per pair) collected from all over Denmark, with a mean age of 57 years (range 46-68 years), 45% men.

The iPLEX genotyping assay developed for use with the MassARRAY platform was used to genotype the selected SNPs in the second discovery stage. The iPLEX genotyping assay is based on mass spectrometry and enables genotyping of 2536 custom SNPs on a sample in a single reaction. For quality control purposes, the system first automatically calls the genotypes and then generates cluster plots for all SNPs that are inspected individually by experienced technicians who check whether the plots show clear separation of the genotype clusters.That did not pass quality control, and two SNPs where no heterozygotes could be detected; thus, lack of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was the quality control. Negative controls were included in the genotyping procedure (8 per 384-well plate), and importantly, 4% of samples were genotyped twice to confirm reproducibility (reproducibility was 99.7%).

Results

Table 1 provides the characteristics of the persons achieving longevity and the comparison group in each of the four CHARGE discovery cohorts at the time of DNA collection. In line with the design of the study, persons achieving longevity were 10-20 years older than participants in the comparison group at baseline and were more likely to be women. Between 45% and 83% of those achieving longevity were still alive at the time that longevity status was ascertained. Among those who had died, the distributions of causes of death differed between those achieving longevity and the comparison group. Whereas 6%-12% of those achieving longevity died of cancer, more than 30% of the comparison group had death attributed to cancer. The prevalence of diabetes and a history of ever smoking were higher in the comparison group than in persons achieving longevity. The baseline prevalence of other cardiovascular risk factor levels showed substantial overlap between the two groups.

Statistical Analysis

Using logistic regression, each imputed and observed HapMap SNP was tested for association with the longevity outcome using an additive genetic model adjusting for sex. The mean dosage of one of the alleles (a value between 0 and 2) was the predictor for imputed SNPs. The CHS additionally adjusted for field study site in the regression model, and the FHS used generalized estimating equations to account for familial correlations.

We used the ratio of observed to expected variance in the imputed SNP genotype counts as a quality control metric for imputed SNPs (43). This ratio, multiplied by the sample size, is an estimate of the effective sample size. In the imputation software MaCH, this ratio is called r2 as it is an estimate of the allelic correlation between the imputed genotypes and the true genotypes for the SNP. A total of 2,287,520 SNPs that had average minor allele frequency greater than 0.01 and were genotyped or imputed in all studies with variance ratio greater than 0.1.

The genomic control inflation factor lambda (λ) for each cohort was less than 1.05 (45). After meta-analysis, overall inflation of the meta-analysis p-values was minor (λ = 1.034; Figure 1). None of the SNP longevity associations achieved the pre-specified level of genome-wide significance of p < 5x10^-8 (Figures 1 and 2). There were 273 SNP associations with meta-analysis p < 10^-4, and of these, 7 SNP associations had p < 10^-5 (Supplementary Table 2). Under the null hypothesis that there are no associations in the genome, we would expect 0.0001 x ~2.3 million = ~230 hits.

Table 2 shows the top 24 independent SNPs associated with longevity along with the number of supporting SNPs (additional SNPs with linkage disequilibrium r^2 > .80 and p < 10^-4). Thus, for example, there were 19 supporting SNPs on chromosome 15 in or near the longevity assurance homologue 3 (LASS3) gene, with the strongest association (OR = 0.79, p = 1.2x10^-5) noted for rs8029244. The study-specific ORs for the 24 SNP associations shown in Table 2 were in the same direction and were of similar magnitude across the four cohorts (Figure 3; Supplementary Table 3).

Of the 24 strongest independent regions shown in Table 2, the 22 SNPs tested in all four CHARGE cohorts were selected for further evaluation, and 16 were successfully genotyped in the second stage cohorts. Only 1 of the 16 SNPs had a smaller p-value after including the replication. 

Observed -log10(p-value)
lambda=1.032
Expected -log10(p-value)
    7
8
9
10
12
14
16
18
21
Coordinate

Figure 2. Plot of genome-wide association study for longevity meta-analysis (persons surviving to age 90 years, n = 1,836, and comparison group, n = 1,955) showing the log (p values) based on the fixed-effects meta-analysis by chromosome. Line indicates threshold for genome-wide significance of 5x10^-8.

Figure 1. Quantile-quantile plot for the 2,287,520 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the meta-analysis of survival to ageProtein-A2 (PAPPA2) is a gene that encodes a protein involved in insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling. The IGF pathway has been implicated in aging and age-related diseases, such as cancer and cardiovascular disease (55). The inconsistent direction of association for the other SNPs highlights the complex nature of longevity, suggesting that there may be many genes with small effects that contribute to this trait. 

The collaboration of the CHARGE Consortium allowed for a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for longevity in a sample of long-lived individuals and a comparison group from the same longitudinal community-based cohort studies. Although none of the SNP associations achieved genome-wide significance in the first discovery phase, a polymorphism associated with the MINPP1 gene was among the strongest associations observed in the sample, with effect sizes similar within all four cohorts. The finding related to the MINPP1 gene was strengthened after including two additional cohorts in a second discovery phase but did not reach genome-wide significance. 

Among the top 10 associations in the initial meta-analysis, additional SNP associations of potential interest in longevity include SNPs in or near LASS3, ACCN1, IL20RB, and PAPPA2. These SNPs are near genes that have not previously been reported to be associated with longevity in human populations but are interesting because these genes are conserved in basic biological pathways.

The strengths of this study include its community-based prospective design, long-term follow-up of cohorts, and use of controls drawn from within the same cohorts. The large number of long-lived individuals reported here is greater than other studies in literature, allowing for greater ability to identify SNPs with small effects. However, differences in causes of death between long-lived individuals and comparison groups are expected as death from cancer tends to occur earlier in life than death from heart disease or dementia.

In summary, this study suggests that longevity is a complex trait and that there may be many genes with small effects that contribute to this trait. The findings related to the MINPP1 gene and other SNPs near conserved genes in basic biological pathways are of potential interest in longevity research. Future GWAS aiming to identify variants for this phenotype will have to consider small effect sizes and target a sample size larger than the nearly 2,000 long-lived individuals in this study.healthspan in mice. Nature. 2003; 421(6920):182-187.

Protein A2 (PAPPA2) is a metalloproteinase that regulates the local insulin-like growth factor pathway action (55). Genetic deletion extends lifespan in mice by 30-40% (56) and is characterized by a delay in thymic involution (57) and low rates of tumor incidence (56). Although the associations reported here did not reach the a priori specified level of significance, the findings are important to report so that they can be replicated in studies without whole-genome genotyping and compared with future studies, such as in centenarian studies and family studies of longevity. Effect size estimates noted here support birth cohort, but the overlap between the birth year of the comparison group and that of the long-lived participants was limited. Further follow-up of these cohorts is needed to increase our ability to examine potential birth cohort effects. The study design of the cohorts examined in the second stage was different from that of the initial four-study CHARGE meta-analysis because the comparison groups were derived from younger participants, both living and deceased, who were not from the same cohort as those achieving longevity. Certainly, there are important environmental factors that would be necessary for the fulfillment of the genetic potential for longevity. Heterogeneity in environmental exposures and gene-environment interactions requires further study. Finally, these results cannot be extended to populations of other ancestry.

In conclusion, this meta-analysis of GWAS data for longevity from four large cohorts and two additional cohorts has implicated several genes involved in conserved basic mechanisms of cellular function. Analysis of more extreme survival phenotypes such as centenarians, additional follow-up to increase sample size in these cohorts for this phenotype, or evaluation of more specific phenotypes such as disease-free survival may support and refine these initial findings.

Conflict of Interest: The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the views of the NIA, NHLBI, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, or NIH.

Supplementary material can be found at: http://biomed.gerontologyjournals.

Acknowledgments: We are indebted to the participants and staff in the AGES-Reykjavik, the CHS, the FHS, and the RS for their important contributions. We acknowledge the NHLBI, which has made the Framingham SNP Health Association Resource project possible. Numbers N01-HC-85079 through N01-HC-85086, N01-HC-35129, N01-HC-15103, N01-HC-55222, N01-HC-75150, and N01-HC-45133 and grant numbers U01 HL080295 and R01 HL087652 from the NHLBI and R01 AG023629 from the NIA, with additional contribution from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. A full list of principal CHS investigators and institutions can be found at http://www.chs-nhlbi.org/pi.htm. DNA handling and genotyping were supported in part by National Center for Research Resources grant M01-RR00425 to the Cedars-Sinai General Clinical Research Center Genotyping core and National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases grant DK063491 to the Southern California Diabetes Endocrinology Research Center. The FHS phenotype-genotype analyses were supported by the NIA grant numbers R01AG029451, R01AG028321, R01AG033193, and R01 AG031287. The FHS of the NHLBI of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Boston University School of Medicine were supported by the NHLBI's FHS contract number N01-HC-25195 and its contract with Affymetrix, Inc. for genotyping services (contract number N02-HL-6-4278). Analyses reflect intellectual input and resource development from the FHS investigators participating in the SNP Health Association Resource project. A portion of this research was conducted using the Linux Cluster for Genetic Analysis (LinGA-II) funded by the Robert Dawson Evans Endowment of the Department of Medicine at Boston University School of Medicine and Boston Medical Center. D.P.K.'s effort was supported by a grant from the National Institute of Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases and the NIA (R01 AR/AG 41398). The RS is supported by the Erasmus Medical Center and Erasmus University Rotterdam; the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO); the Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMw); the Research Institute for Diseases in the Elderly; the Ministry of Education, Culture and Science; the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sports; and the European Commission (DG XII). The genetic analyses were supported by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research grant number 175.01.2005.011. This study was supported by the Netherlands GenSorry, but the text enclosed in ``` ``` was just a list of references, and it did not need any proofreading or editing. Is there anything else I can help you with?Study. Exp Gerontol. ; (): Saugstad JA, Roberts JA, Dong J, Zeitouni S, Evans RJ. Analysis of the membrane topology of the acid-sensing ion channel a. J Biol Chem. ; (): Waldmann R, Champigny G, Voilley N, Lauritzen I, Lazdunski M. The mammalian degenerin MDEG, an amiloride-sensitive cation channel activated by mutations causing neurodegeneration in Caenorhabditis elegans. J Biol Chem. ; (): Bernardinelli L, Murgia SB, Bitti PP, et al. Association between the ACCN gene and multiple sclerosis in Central East Sardinia. PLoS One. ; ():e Page NM, Butlin DJ, Lomthaisong K, Lowry PJ. The characterization of pregnancy-associated plasma protein-E and the identification of an alternative splice variant. Placenta. ; (): Conover CA, Bale LK. Loss of pregnancy-associated plasma protein A extends lifespan in mice. Aging Cell. ; (): Vallejo AN, Michel JJ, Bale LK, Lemster BH, Borghesi L, Conover CA. Resistance to age-dependent thymic atrophy in long-lived mice that are deficient in pregnancy-associated plasma protein A. Proc Natl Acad Sci. ; () from http://biomedgerontology.oxfordjournals.org/ at National Sun Yat-sen University on August 22, 2014