FOXO3 Gene Variants and Human Aging: Coding Variants May Not Be Key Players 

Timothy A. Donlon, J. David Curb, Qimei He, John S. Grove, Kamal H. Masaki, Beatriz Rodriguez, Ayako Elliott, D. Craig Willcox, and Bradley J. Willcox conducted a study on FOXO3, which is known as a master gene in aging due to its association with longevity in multiple organisms and human populations. The study aimed to enhance the resources for fine mapping the coding region in a long-lived Japanese American population since the actual functional variant is unidentified. 

The study revealed that out of 38 published variants, six are misalignments with homologous nonallelic sequences from FOXO3B (ZNF286B), a pseudogene on a different chromosome; two are attributable to ZNF286B only; and the remaining 30 were unconfirmed, indicating that they are very rare and not likely involved in longevity. A novel, unique, nonsynonymous coding variant in exon 3 (Gly566Ala; rs138174682) was identified that is prevalent in multiple ethnic groups but appeared too rare for major longevity effects in the study populations.

The study also discusses how genetics may account for 10%50% of the variability in human life span, depending upon the population, but little is known about the effector genes. Studies of model organisms have identified several evolutionarily conserved biological pathways that have a major influence on aging and age-related traits.

SNPs are gene variants that occur on average once every 300 bp and can be used to discover nearby functional variants that are associated with a disease or other phenotype. However, it can be challenging to find which variant is responsible for the biologic change that produced the phenotype because several closely linked variants may be in strong linkage disequilibrium with the original gene variant. Numerous SNPs within the FOXO3 locus are associated with longevity, but they are all located in a haplotype block on the order of 100 kb in size on chromosome 6. A longevity-associated functional variant could be anywhere in this 100+ kb region, which is centered on the second of four introns.

The study tested the hypothesis that the daf-16 human homologue, FOXO3, a gene on chromosome 6 that codes for a forkhead Box O transcription factor, might be important in human aging and longevity. Associations of three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of FOXO3 with healthy aging and longevity were initially reported in male Americans of Japanese ancestry and were later confirmed in German and French populations as well as Italian, American (northern and western European ancestry), Chinese, and several other populations.

The study concludes that the SNPs associated with longevity are not validated coding SNPs in FOXO3 but rather result from misalignment between the coding region of the FOXO3 gene with its highly homologous pseudogene, FOXO3B. The study identified a novel, unique, nonsynonymous coding variant in exon 3 (Gly566Ala; rs138174682) that is prevalent in multiple ethnic groups but appeared too rare for major longevity effects in the study populations. The quest to identify a functional variant (typically a coding variant) in FOXO3 will undoubtedly help us better understand the role that this gene plays in human longevity and healthy aging.Paucity of variation in these FOXO3/FOXO3B sequence alignments. FOXO3 is known to have a pseudogene on chromosome 17, FOXO3B (shown in Figure 1 and 2). FOXO3 exon 3 was used in a BLAST search (18) to examine this homology in more detail. AF032887 was chosen to represent the homology. After sequencing DNA from 95 persons in a random sample of persons living in Hawaii, we were not able to confirm the existence of any of the 38 sequence variants that were reported in the most recent version (version 134, GRCh37.p2 of November 8, 2011) of the SNP public database accessible through the NCBI website: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/. These SNPs are either extremely rare in our multiethnic populations, are the result of misalignment with other highly homologous sequences, or the result of sequencing and/or assembly errors. They are clearly not responsible for the longevity association in our prior work (9) and are unlikely to be important to human longevity. In an attempt to determine the reasons for this failure in confirming the remaining 38 variants, we performed BLAST searches of sequences adjacent to these published FOXO3 SNPs and found that many of them mapped to chromosome 17 with 100% homologies or were the result of misalignment with the location of the highly homologous FOXO3 pseudogene (20), known as FOXO3B (Figure 2). FOXO3B is homologous to exons 2, 3, and 4 of FOXO3, and there are a number of nonallelic nucleotides that align with published SNPs. None of the exon 3 SNPs was verified by our long-range chromosome-specific sequencing effort. In sum, none of the coding SNPs listed in dbSNP could be verified. Eight of the 38 previously published coding SNPs were found to result from misalignment of sequences between chromosomes 6 and 17; the remaining 30 could not be verified (not found in our multiethnic populations; Table 2). FOXO3B itself lies within another gene referred to as ZNF286B, a putative zinc finger protein 286B (Gene ID: 729288). Collectively, these results indicate that these SNPs are either extremely rare in our multiethnic populations, are the result of misalignment with other highly homologous sequences, or the result of sequencing and/or assembly errors. They are clearly not responsible for the longevity association in our prior work (9) and are unlikely to be important to human longevity. One novel variant that we discovered in the current sequencing effort is shown in Table 3; it was a nonsynonymous SNP located at position 108985733 on chromosome 6 which results in a G to C transversion and an alanine being substituted for a glycine at amino acid 566 (SNP ID: rs138174682).

Allele frequencies of G1697C (Gly566Ala). A collection of 85 random multiethnic (Caucasian, Filipino, Japanese, Chinese, and mixed ethnicity) genetic samples was chosen for allele frequency determination from the original 95 sequenced samples on the basis of intact, complete, high-quality sequences. The ages of these participants ranged from 10 to 78 years. We found that of 85 individuals, ten were heterozygous and two were homozygous for the G1697C variant (rs138174682; see Table 4). To determine if this variant might be useful to study longevity in our Kuakini Honolulu Heart Program cohort (American men of Japanese ancestry), we selected 282 persons with Japanese surnames for further analysis. Of these 282, only eight were heterozygous and none was homozygous for this variant. Because the allele frequency was not extremely rare, we decided to assess this SNP with our original Hawaii Lifespan Study case-control study sample (9) to assess whether it might be an important contributor to the longevity phenotype. The cases had a longevity phenotype defined as survival to at least 95 years of age.

Figure 1 shows the sequencing strategy used in this study. Chromosome 6-specific primers were used to amplify a 1.5-Kb genomic fragment of exon 3. Sequences were generated from 95 individuals of various ethnicities living in Hawaii and screened for nucleotide substitutions. Forward primers are denoted as dark green, whereas reverse primers are light green. The yellow box denotes the protein-coding exon 3, whereas the solid line denotes the noncoding genomic sequence.

Figure 2 shows an alignment of the FOXO3 gene (GenBank NM_201559.2), also known as FOXO3A, with the homologous genomic sequences onvariants, misalignments, sequencing/assembly errors, and population-specific variation. In this study, we focused on putative coding sequence variants in FOXO3 and verified only one SNP (located in exon 3) using long-range chromosome 6-specific sequencing. Eight of the 38 previously published coding SNPs resulted from misalignment of sequences between chromosomes 6 and 17, and the remaining 30 could not be verified in our populations. The newly discovered Gly566Ala variant (rs138174682), which is three bases away from a CREB-binding protein site at K569, might change the conformation of the FOXO3 protein and have functional implications. However, its allele frequency was too low in our study population of Japanese Americans to account for our previous study findings. Replication remains a major challenge for future studies, and care must be taken to reduce the problem of paralogous sequence variants in DNA sequencing studies. Only two genes, APOE and FOXO3, have consistent and widespread replication in multiple human populations for their associations with aging-related phenotypes and longevity.Variants from short shotgun sequencing efforts will no doubt add many invalid variants to publicly available datasets that may lead to wasted efforts and unrealistic expectations when mapping complex genetic traits (32). Through the use of longer-range DNA sequencing and careful annotation of the genome, primarily through efforts like the ENCODE Project (33), there should be an improvement in the resources that can help elucidate functional variants that are associated with complex phenotypes.

With regard to discovering the longevity-associated functional variant for FOXO3, this is as yet unresolved. It appears from the current study that it is unlikely (although not impossible) that a coding SNP will be identified as the functional variant responsible for human longevity. Interestingly, Banasik and colleagues (34) did find that one variant in intron 2, rs2802292, a noncoding SNP, demonstrates a small but significant difference in messenger RNA levels in functional studies. This same variant had the strongest association in our previous case-control study of healthy aging and longevity (9). Whether this SNP is the functional variant remains to be proven and more functional studies are required. For example, cell physiology experiments measuring messenger RNA levels need to be performed, keeping all genetic information the same except for this variant, as well as aforementioned model organism and human studies.

Some of the most basic groundwork in humans could begin with an assessment of the potential relation between mortality from the common diseases of aging, including coronary heart disease, stroke, and cancer, which account for the majority of human deaths, and variation in FOXO3. Already, there is growing evidence for FOXO3 as a tumor suppressor. For example, downregulation of FOXO3 activity is seen in various cancers (43,44). Indeed, Hawaii Lifespan Study men who had the longevity phenotype (and were more likely to have a protective FOXO3 genotype) had fewer cancers in their medical history (9). Ongoing studies with prospectively collected data can address whether and how the cause of death is modified by variation in the FOXO3 gene. This will provide further clues as to mechanisms for FOXO3's effects on human aging and longevity. Such information may enhance translational efforts that link model organism and human research and could have important implications for human health span (45).

In conclusion, all published nonsynonymous (coding and resulting in amino acid change) SNPs identified in the FOXO3 gene, to date, are either invalid or too rare to be of consequence to human longevity. The novel variant that we identified through detailed sequencing appears to be too low in frequency (0.082) to be responsible for our previously reported association of FOXO3 variants with human longevity (9), although it is conceivable that this novel SNP is associated with a disease phenotype at a younger age or is important in other populations. This suggests that the functional SNP is most likely a noncoding SNP from intron 2, where all previously reported associations have occurred. Future research should include complete sequencing of intron 2 and annotation of regulatory elements, in order to identify candidates for functional study of the FOXO3 gene and human aging.

Funding: We appreciate the support of contract N01-AG-4-2149, grants 5 U01 AG019349-05 and 2R01 AG027060-05A2 (Hawaii Lifespan Study) from the National Institute on Aging and contract N01-HC-05102 from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

Acknowledgments: Author contributions: T.A.D., B.J.W., Q.H., J.S.G., K.H.M., B.R., and J.D.C. designed research; T.A.D., B.J.W., Q.H., R.C., J.S.G., K.H.M., B.R., and J.D.C. performed research; T.A.D. contributed new reagents and analytic tools; Q.H. and J.S.G. analyzed data; and T.A.D., B.J.W., Q.H., J.S.G., K.H.M., B.R., D.C.W., and J.D.C. wrote the article.

In the future, when more evidence accumulates as to a functional SNP(s), rigorous assessment with model organisms and human studies will be needed. Work with model organisms has already provided some clues that might be helpful for mechanistic studies of the effects of FOXO3 variation in humans. For example, oxidative stress, still a leading theory of how we age (35,36), is one potential mechanism. Indeed, the PI3K/Akt signaling cascade, a downstream target of insulin signaling, is an important inhibitor of FOXO function. Important antioxidant enzyme expression, including manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) and catalase, depends on PI3K/Akt/FOXO3 activity (37,38), and oxidative stress appears linked to human longevity (39). Yet, work to date shows that mice deficient in the FOXO targetStudies: Contributors to Our Understanding of the Aging Process and Current Gerontology Geriatric Research. Barzilai N, Atzmon G, Schechter C, et al. Unique lipoprotein and genotype associated with exceptional longevity. JAMA. Density lipoprotein cholesterol, cholesteryl ester transfer protein gene variants, and healthy aging in very old Japanese-American men. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. ( ). Estivill X, Cheung J, Pujana MA, Nakabayashi K, Scherer SW, Tsui LC. Chromosomal regions containing high-density and ambiguously mapped putative single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) correlate with segmental duplications in the human genome. Hum Mol Genet. ( ). Musumeci L, Arthur JW, Cheung FS, Hoque A, Lippman S, Reichardt JK. Single nucleotide differences (SNDs) in the DNA Polymorphism database may lead to errors in genotyping and haplotyping studies. Hum Mutat. ( ). Manolio TA, Collins FS, Cox NJ, et al. Finding the missing heritability of complex diseases. Nature. ( ). ENCODE Project Consortium. The ENCODE (Encyclopedia of DNA Elements) Project. Science. ( ). Banasik K, Ribel-Madsen R, Gjesing AP, et al. The FOXO A rs G-allele associates with improved peripheral and hepatic insulin sensitivity and increased skeletal muscle-FOXO A NA expression in twins. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. ( ):E Beckman KB, Ames BN. The free radical theory of aging matures. Physiol Rev. ( ). Salmon AB, Richardson A, Perez VI. Update on the oxidative stress theory of aging: does oxidative stress play a role in aging or healthy aging? Free Radic Biol Med. ( ). Brunet A, Bonni A, Zigmond MJ, et al. Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription factor. Cell. ( ). Kops GJ, Dansen TB, Polderman PE, et al. Forkhead transcription factor FOXO a protects quiescent cells from oxidative stress. Nature. ( ). Suzuki M, Willcox DC, Rosenbaum MW, Willcox BJ. Oxidative stress and longevity in Okinawa: an investigation of blood lipid peroxidation and tocopherol in Okinawan centenarians. Curr Gerontol Geriatr Res. ( ). Zhang Y, Ikeno Y, Qi W, et al. Mice deficient in both Mn superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase- have increased oxidative damage and a greater incidence of pathology but no reduction in longevity. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. ( ). Jang YC, Perez VI, Song W. et al. Overexpression of Mn superoxide dismutase does not increase lifespan in mice. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. ( ). Ferber EC, Peck B, Delpuech O, Bell GP, East P, Schulze A. FOXO a regulates reactive oxygen metabolism by inhibiting mitochondrial gene expression. Cell Death Differ [published online ahead of print December ]. doi:/cdd. Yang JY, Hung MC. A new fork for clinical application: targeting forkhead transcription factors in cancer. Clin Cancer Res. ( ). Greer E, Brunet A. FOXO transcription factors at the interface between longevity and tumor suppression. Oncogene. ( ). Lebel M, Picard F, Ferland G, Gaudreau P. Drugs, nutrients, and phytoactive principles improving the health span of rodent models of human age-related diseases. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. ( ).