Genetic Stabilization of Transthyretin, Cerebrovascular Disease, and Life Expectancy 
Louise S. Hornstrup, Ruth Frikke-Schmidt, Børge G. Nordestgaard, Anne Tybjærg-Hansen 

Objective
Transthyretin can cause amyloidosis attributable to destabilization of transthyretin tetramers in plasma. We tested the hypothesis that genetic stabilization of transthyretin associates with reduced risk of vascular disease and increased life expectancy.

Approach and Results
We included 68,602 participants from 2 prospective studies of the general population. We genotyped for 2 stabilizing genetic variants in the transthyretin gene (TTR), R104H and T119M, and determined the association of genotypes with plasma levels of transthyretin, measures of thyroid function, risk of vascular disease, and life expectancy. During a mean follow-up of 32 years, 10,636 participants developed vascular disease. We identified 321 heterozygotes for T119M (frequency, 0.47%); R104H was not detected. First, mean plasma transthyretin and thyroxine levels were increased by 17% (26 g/mL) and 20% (19 nmol/L), respectively, in heterozygotes versus noncarriers (P=0.007 and P<0.0001), demonstrating functionality of this variant in the general population. Second, corresponding hazard ratios were 0.70 (95% confidence interval, 0.51-0.97) for all vascular diseases, 0.85 (0.59-1.23) for cardiovascular disease, 0.45 (0.25-0.81) for cerebrovascular disease, 0.47 (0.25-0.88) for ischemic cerebrovascular disease, and 0.31 (0.04-2.22) for hemorrhagic stroke. The cumulative incidence of cerebrovascular disease as a function of age was decreased in heterozygotes versus noncarriers (P=0.005). Third, median age at death from all causes, from vascular and cerebrovascular diseases, and after diagnosis of vascular disease, and median age at diagnosis of vascular disease, was increased by 5 to 10 years in heterozygotes versus noncarriers (P=0.002-0.05).

Conclusions
These results are compatible with an association between genetic stabilization of transthyretin and decreased risk of cerebrovascular disease, and with increased life expectancy in the general population. (Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013;33:1441-1447.)

Key Words: amyloid, amyloid angiopathy, cerebrovascular disease/stroke, genetic epidemiology, vascular disease, wild-type transthyretin in many organs and in the walls of small arteries but with clinical manifestations mainly from the heart attributable to restrictive cardiomyopathy. The hereditary forms of transthyretin amyloidosis are presumably rare and caused by mutations in the transthyretin gene (TTR) that make the tetrameric protein more unstable and prone to misfold into fibrils. The hereditary forms of transthyretin amyloidosis are typically of earlier onset and more severe than in senile systemic amyloidosis. Clinically, these patients may present with polyneuropathy, cardiomyopathy, or cerebral amyloid angiopathy characterized by deposition of amyloid in cerebral blood vessels, and clinically by both hemorrhagic and ischemic lesions. Hence, both senile systemic amyloidosis and hereditary forms may have deposition of amyloid in small arteries. 

Amyloidosis is a term for a group of degenerative diseases characterized by extracellular deposition of pathological insoluble fibrillar proteins in organs and tissues. Transthyretin is primarily synthesized in the liver, but is also produced in the choroid plexus. Although the main function is to transport retinol-binding protein, transthyretin also transports 15% and 80% of thyroxine in blood and cerebrospinal fluid, respectively. In both plasma and cerebrospinal fluid, transthyretin circulates as a tetramer comprising 4 identical subunits. Destabilization of these tetramers leads to monomer misfolding and amyloidogenesis, a process that can be prevented by ligands such as thyroxine and by drugs that stabilize transthyretin tetramers. In humans, both wild-type transthyretin tetramers and tetramers comprising mutant and wild-type subunits can cause amyloidosis. Senile systemic amyloidosis is a common form characterized by wild-type transthy(Genotype CC) and 321 TTR T119M Table. Characteristics of Heterozygotes for TTR T119M (rs28933981) vs Noncarriers in the Copenhagen City Heart Study and the Copenhagen General Population Study Combined. 

TTR T119M Genotype Noncarriers (CC) Heterozygotes (CT) P Value No. of subjects (%) 68,281 (99.5) 321 (0.47) Age, y 58 (47-67) 56 (47-68) 0.71 Sex (F/M) 37,805/30,476 188/133 0.25 Total cholesterol, mmol/L 5.6 (4.9-6.4) 5.7 (5.0-6.4) 0.88 Triglycerides, mmol/L 1.4 (1.0-2.1) 1.5 (1.0-2.3) 0.41 LDL cholesterol, mmol/L 3.2 (2.6-3.9) 3.2 (2.6-4.0) 0.92 HDL cholesterol, mmol/L 1.6 (1.3-1.9) 1.5 (1.3-1.9) 0.65 Body mass index, kg/m2 26 (23-28) 26 (23-28) 0.63 Hypertension, % 53% 55% 0.81 Diabetes mellitus, % 4% 4% 0.60 Smoking, % 61% 60% 0.69 Physical activity, % 45% 45% 0.71 Lipid-lowering therapy, % 8% 7% 0.54

Values are median (interquartile range) or percentage. Diabetes mellitus was a self-reported disease, use of insulin, use of oral hypoglycemic drugs, or nonfasting plasma glucose >11 mmol/L. Smoking was active and former smokers. Hypertension was systolic blood pressure >140 mm Hg, diastolic blood pressure >90 mm Hg, or use of antihypertensive medication. Physical activity was 4 hours per week of light physical activity in leisure time. Lipid-lowering therapy was mainly statins. P values by Mann-Whitney U test or Pearson 2 test. HDL indicates high-density lipoprotein; and LDL, low-density lipoprotein.

Figure 1. Plasma levels of transthyretin in T119M heterozygotes vs noncarriers. A, All 1650 participants with transthyretin levels measured. B, Heterozygotes matched 1:7 with controls by age (in 10-year age groups) and by sex. Values are mean standard error of the mean. P values by Mann-Whitney U test. CC indicates noncarriers; and CT, T119M heterozygotes.

The cumulative incidence of cerebrovascular disease was reduced in T119M heterozygotes versus noncarriers (Figure 4; log rank, P=0.005). At the age of 75 years, the cumulative incidence of cerebrovascular disease was 5% in T119M heterozygotes and 12% in noncarriers (Figure 4).

TTR T119M genotype associated with a 20% (19 nmol/L) increase in mean plasma levels of total thyroxine in heterozygotes versus noncarriers. Mean total thyroxine levels were 114 nmol/L and 95 nmol/L, respectively (Figure 2; P<0.0001). In contrast, genotype did not associate with other measures of thyroid function, that is, thyroid stimulating hormone, triiodothyronine or triiodothyronine uptake test, an indirect measure of the amount of thyroxine bound to thyroid-binding globulin, (Figure 2; P=0.56-0.63), or with plasma levels of albumin (Table I in the online-only Data Supplement; P=0.89). In plasma, thyroid-binding globulin normally binds 70% to 80% of thyroxine, transthyretin binds 10% to 15%, and the rest is bound to albumin.3,24 Hence, these data suggest that T119M heterozygotes have increased total thyroxine levels attributable to an increased binding of thyroxine to transthyretin but normal thyroid function. Results were similar after adjusting for age and sex by linear regression analysis (-coefficient=18, corresponding to a mean increase in thyroxine of 18 nmol/L inThan normal. Therefore, the higher transthyretin levels indicate a protein less likely to dissociate and aggregate into fibrils.

It has been shown both by extensive physicochemical studies in vitro and by ex vivo studies of sera from T119M heterozygotes that increased binding affinity for thyroxine reflects the stabilizing effect of T119M on the transthyretin tetramer. Furthermore, adding thyroxine, a natural ligand for transthyretin, has been shown to stabilize wild-type transthyretin and inhibit fibril formation in vitro. Therefore, increased plasma levels of total thyroxine in heterozygotes is also a marker for the increased transthyretin tetramer stability attributable to T119M. We found that carriers had a 20% (19 nmol/L) increase in total thyroxine levels compared with noncarriers but normal thyroid function, indicating that the increased thyroxine level was attributable to increased binding to transthyretin. Thus, our study demonstrates that T119M is functional and stabilizes transthyretin in the general population in vivo.

Figure 4 shows the cumulative incidence of cerebrovascular disease as a function of age in T119M heterozygotes (green) vs noncarriers (red) from the general population. Cerebrovascular disease was ischemic cerebrovascular disease (transitory ischemic attacks, amaurosis fugax, or ischemic stroke) or hemorrhagic stroke. 

Postmortem studies have shown that senile systemic amyloidosis affects 25% of individuals >80 years; however, the impact of this condition in the general population is not known. Although cardiomyopathy may be the most severe manifestation of senile systemic amyloidosis, this condition has been associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction in autopsy studies and possibly an increased risk of cardioembolic stroke. Furthermore, vascular deposits of transthyretin amyloid have been found systemically in cases with senile systemic amyloidosis, indicating that the vascular integrity may be compromised in other organs as well, including the brain. Therefore, we propose that the protective effect on vascular disease associated with the stabilizing variant T119M may be attributable to a reduced deposition of wild-type transthyretin in the wall of small arteries. In addition, in the present study, heterozygotes had increased life expectancy overall and among those who died from vascular and cerebrovascular disease, increased life expectancy after diagnosis of vascular disease and increased age at diagnosis of vascular disease compared with noncarriers. These results support that T119M may act through an effect on the vascular wall.

The sporadic form of cerebral amyloid angiopathy with deposition of A, the protein also implicated in Alzheimer disease, is a common condition affecting 40% to 50% of individuals aged 60 years and leading to an increased risk of both ischemic and hemorrhagic cerebral events. Several studies have shown that transthyretin can interact with A and possibly inhibit A amyloid deposition. Thus, another potential explanation for the apparent protective effect of T119M on cerebrovascular disease could be that T119M stabilizes transthyretin in the cerebrospinal fluid and, by binding A, protects against sporadic cerebral amyloid angiopathy.

In conclusion, these results are compatible with an association between genetic stabilization of transthyretin and decreased risk of cerebrovascular disease but need to be confirmed in other large studies.

Acknowledgments: We thank Mette Refstrup and Teresa Rozenfeld for expert technical assistance. We are indebted to the staff and participants of the Copenhagen City Heart Study and the Copenhagen General Population Study for their important contributions.

Other studies have pointed to a general role for transthyretin in neurobiology and repair. More specifically, transthyretin has been suggested to be an important factor in response to brain ischemia; however, human evidence is lacking. Although the association with cerebrovascular disease in our study seems to be attributable mainly to a reduced risk of ischemic cerebrovascular disease, firm conclusions regarding the effect on hemorrhagic stroke cannot be based on the relatively limited number of individuals with this endpoint.

Sources of Funding: This work was supported by the Danish Medical Research Council (grant no. 09-065553), the Lundbeck Foundation, the Research Fund at Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Chief Physician Johan Boserup and Lise Boserups fund, Aase and Ejnar Danielsens grant, Ingeborg and Leo Dannins grant, Henry Hansen and Wifes grant, and a grant from the Order of Odd Fellows; all from Copenhagen, Denmark.

Dietary factors such as resveratrol (active component in red grapes/red wine), curcumin (major bioactive polyphenol of turmeric), andpopulation. 

Westermark P, Cornwell GG III. Senile systemic amyloidosis. Am J Pathol.  ;  : 

Cornwell GG III, Murdoch WL, Kyle RA, Westermark P, Pitknen Frequency and distribution of senile cardiovascular amyloid: a pathologic correlation. Am J Med.  ;  : 

Tanskanen M, Peuralinna T, Polvikoski T, Notkola IL, Sulkava R, Hardy Singleton A, Kiuru-Enari S, Paetau A, Tienari PJ, Myllykangas L. Systemic amyloidosis affects % of the very aged and associates genetic variation in alpha-macroglobulin and tau: an autopsy study. Ann Med.  ;  : 

Falk RH. Cardiac amyloidosis: a treatable disease, often Circulation.  ;  : 

Benson MD. Amyloidosis. In: Schriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS, Valle eds. The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease. New York: McGraw-Hill;  : 

Iodinated transthyretin derivatives are candidate drugs for transthyretin amyloidosis, showing improved stability compared with transthyretin. Thyroxine binding stabilizes transthyretin through 4 iodine substituents, and there are additional binding sites for thyroxine left unbound on transthyretin. Hence, total plasma iodine levels may correlate with transthyretin levels and may be higher in individuals with higher transthyretin levels, such as in T119M heterozygotes because transthyretin binds more thyroxine and therefore more iodine.

Further limitations to our study include that we only examined whites and therefore our findings may not translate to populations of other ethnicities. However, because T119M is present in both whites of European ancestry and in blacks of African American ancestry, the effect of T119M in humans is probably not ethnicity-specific. Nevertheless, large studies of other ethnic groups are needed to address this issue. Finally, R104H, a genetic variant previously identified in Asians, was not detected in our study but may have similar protective effects as T119M in Asian populations.

In the present study, we show that genetic stabilization of transthyretin attributable to heterozygosity for T119M protects against cerebrovascular disease. Thus, our data could suggest that T119M protects against amyloid deposition in the brain. 

Yamada M. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy: an overview. Neuropathology.  ;  : 

Almeida MR, Alves IL, Terazaki H, Ando Y, Saraiva MJ. Comparative studies of two transthyretin variants with protective effects on familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy: TTR R H and TTR T M. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.  ;  : 

Sekijima Y, Wiseman RL, Matteson J, Hammarstrm P, Miller SR, Sawkar AR, Balch WE, Kelly JW. The biological and chemical basis for tissue-selective amyloid disease. Cell.  ;  : 

Hammarstrm P, Schneider F, Kelly JW. Trans-suppression of misfolding in an amyloid disease. Science.  ;  : 

Hammarstrm P, Wiseman RL, Powers ET, Kelly JW. Prevention of transthyretin amyloid disease by changing protein misfolding energetics. Science.  ;  : 

Terazaki H, Ando Y, Misumi S, Nakamura M, Ando E, Matsunaga N, Shoji S, Okuyama M, Ideta H, Nakagawa K, Ishizaki T, Ando M, Saraiva MJ. A novel compound heterozygote (FAP ATTR Arg His/ATTR Val Met) with high serum transthyretin (TTR) and retinol binding protein (RBP) levels. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.  ;  : 

Almeida MR, Damas AM, Lans MC, Brouwer A, Saraiva MJ. Thyroxine binding to transthyretin Met Comparative studies of different heterozygotic carriers and structural analysis. Endocrine.  ;  : 

Curtis AJ, Scrimshaw BJ, Topliss DJ, Stockigt JR, George PM, Barlow JW. Thyroxine binding by human transthyretin variants: mutations at position , but not position , increase thyroxine binding affinity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.  ;  : 

Alves IL, Divino CM, Schussler GCThere is no text enclosed in ``` ```. Please provide the text for me to process.