potential longevity genes (Frederiksen et al., 2002a). In this study, we aimed to investigate the possible association between the 110A > C polymorphism in the promoter region of HSP70-1 and human longevity in a cohort of aged Danish twins. The cohort included individuals aged between 70 and 91 years (mean age 75.6 years) who were categorized based on the presence or absence of various diseases and age-related parameters for which a genetic component has already been established.

Four hundred DNA samples from the cohort underwent genotyping using real-time PCR. Aging phenotypes, including diseases, physical and cognitive functioning, were compared with genotype. Among all aging phenotypes studied, self-rated health and relative self-rated health, which represent an individual's overall sense of physical well-being and predict survival at older ages more accurately than objectively measured health status, were associated with the polymorphism.

An association was found between low self-rated health and heterozygosity for the 110A > C polymorphism in the promoter region of HSP70-1. The Hsp70 family of stress proteins plays a crucial role in protecting cells from damage induced by stress and in aiding them to counteract its effects. Hsp70 acts as a chaperone or cooperates with proteolytic pathways in cells. In humans, there are eleven different isoforms of Hsp70 encoded by different genes located at dispersed loci. Three of these isoforms are mapped within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class III region on the short arm of chromosome 6.

Polymorphisms in these three genes have been extensively studied for their association with various autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. However, no association between polymorphisms of the MHC-linked HSP and diseases has been found that would not be explained by linkage disequilibrium with other HLA markers. Nonetheless, protective effects of Hsp70 against oxidative stress suggest that it might be valuable to study HSP polymorphism in conditions associated with oxidant/antioxidant imbalance, such as aging.

This investigation was conducted on DNA samples collected from a cohort of 200 DZ twin pairs aged 70-91 years, from the LSADT study. These samples are part of the Danish Twin Registry, which is the first nationwide twin registry in the world. The LSADT is an ongoing longitudinal study of Danish twins who are more than 70 years old. These individuals have been offered an examination at their home every two years, which includes both a traditional health-related interview and a number of objective and cognitive tests, and a collection of blood samples. The DZ twins from LSADT-1999 wave are the basis of this investigation.

Various parameters have been used as measures of aging, including scoring of physical function such as hand grip strength, activity of daily living (ADL) strength, and ADL endurance; scoring of the mental state of the individual viz. cognitive composite score and mini mental state examination (MMSE). Furthermore, self-rated health (scored both in absolute terms measured on a scale of 15 with the possible responses very good, good, fair, poor, very poor; and in relation to others of the same age) has been shown to have a substantial genetic component.

In a recent cross-sectional study on samples from Calabria, a south Italian region, Altomare et al. (2003) reported that the presence of an allele carrying adenine (allele A), in the 110A > C polymorphism present in the 5 flanking region, 3 base pairs upstream of the heat shock element (HSE) of the promoter region of HSP70-1 gene, was unfavourable for longevity in women. In another association study between polymorphism (2437T > C) in the coding region of HSP70-Hom with human aging, done on the Irish population (Ross et al., 2003), the frequency of T allele has been shown to increase in the old population (80-90 years) as compared to the young controls (19-45 years). However, as will be discussed later, there are confounding factors which occur while performing such cross-sectional studies, where allele frequencies in a group of young controls are compared against the allele frequencies in the oldest-old. Taking this into account, we report the results of our study performed on DNA samples collected from Danish dizygotic (DZ) twin cohort of 400 individuals aged 70-91 years (mean age 75.6), from the Longitudinal Study of Aging Danish Twins (LSADT).Genetic variants of importance to mid- and late-life physical functioning have a heritability of 52% (Frederiksen et al. 2002a). Once heritability is defined for all these age-related traits, the next step is to associate these traits with specific genes. Based on these scores, we have analyzed the association of parameters correlated with human longevity with the 110A > C polymorphism in the HSP70-1 gene. 

Statistical Analysis: We grouped the participants according to their HSP70-1 genotype and compared these groups with respect to various aging phenotypes. Continuous phenotypes (physical ability scores, grip strength, depression, and cognitive scores) were compared across the genotypes using the one-way ANOVA test. Discrete variables (diseases - see Table 3) were compared across the genotypes using Pearson's v2 test. Bonferroni correction on repeated testing was applied.

Genotyping: Genotyping was done using real-time PCR on the LightCycler system (Roche Applied Sciences), which helps to monitor the amplification of PCR product simultaneously using fluorescent-labeled sequence-specific oligonucleotide probes. Probes were designed such that the oligonucleotides were complementary to the allele carrying the nucleotide.

Results: The genotype frequencies of individuals homozygous for allele A (AA), heterozygous for alleles A and C (AC), and homozygous for allele C (CC) were 35% (n = 142), 42.7% (n = 189), and 17.2% (n = 69), respectively (Table 2). The allele frequencies for allele A and allele C were 59.1% and 40.9%, respectively (Table 2), and the genotype frequency was found to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P-value 0.59).

The relationship of aging phenotypes with HSP70-1 genotype is shown in Tables 3-6. Of all the age-related parameters studied, only self-rated health and relative self-rated health (compared to others of the same age) showed an association (P-values of 0.0046 and 0.018, respectively) with the polymorphism at 110 (Tables 5 and 6). As evident from Tables 5 and 6, it is the heterozygous individuals who are more inclined to rate their health as poor, very poor, or worse.

Discussion: Aging and longevity are highly complex traits influenced by genes, environment, and chance (Rattan 2003). The molecular basis of inherited components in aging is far from clear. For studying the genetic basis of human longevity, gene-longevity association studies have been a popular and useful approach. Although a number of genes have been studied for their association with human longevity, the overall picture still remains unclear (Caruso et al. 2001). This is due to various confounding factors that affect the longevity association studies, such as heterogeneity, which may affect the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium of the population on which such studies are carried out. 

In our study, we took a group of 400 individuals aged 70-91 years from LSADT who have been scored for parameters characteristic of successful/unsuccessful aging. These parameters have been studied for their association with polymorphism at 110 of HSP70-1. Of all the parameters studied, self-rated health (scored both in absolute terms and in relation to others of the same age) shows a striking association (P-value 0.0046 and 0.018, respectively). This self-rated health represents an individual's overall sense of physical well-being and has been shown to be a predictor of survival at older ages (McCallum et al. 1994) and a better indicator of future survival than objectively measured health status (Mossey and Shapiro 1982). In our series, we observed a lower health score in the heterozygous individuals. This seems somewhat surprising, first because Altomare et al. found lower survival in females homozygous for allele A (AA genotype), and second because it is difficult to envision a molecular mechanism causing phenotypic domination in heterozygotes. We also did a gender-specific analysis for the association of self-rated health with the 110A > C polymorphism but did not find any sex specificity for this association (data not shown).

Standard statistical methods require independent observations. In this study, we use twins, and it is known that twins correlate for many phenotypes, including a number of age-related traits.This is a well-written text, and no corrections or improvements are necessary.I'm sorry, but there is no text enclosed in ``` ```. Please provide the text for me to proofread and improve.