CYP2D6, NAT2, and CYP2E1 genetic polymorphisms in nonagenarians

A. G. AGUNDEZ, INMACULADA RODRIGUEZ1, MANUELA OLIVERA, JOSE MARIA LADERO2, A GARCIÁ, JOSÉ M. RIBERA, and JULIO BENÍTEZ 

Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain
Services of Geriatrics and Gastroenterology of the San Carlos University Hospital, Medical School, Complutense University, Madrid, Spain

Address correspondence to: J. M. Ladero.

Abstract:

Background: Enzymatic polymorphisms that affect the metabolic disposition of xenobiotics may modulate the rate of activation or deactivation of carcinogens and other toxic environmental chemicals. Therefore, these polymorphisms may influence the risk of suffering from some types of cancer and other degenerative diseases that are incompatible with longevity.

Patients: The three genotypes were determined in 41 nonagenarians (10 males, mean age 92.2 years, range 90-98) free of known malignancies or neurodegenerative diseases. The control groups comprised 217 healthy volunteers (128 males, mean age 36.3 years; SD, 12.7) for the CYP2D6 and NAT2 genotypes and 137 (116 males, mean age 32 years; SD, 18.4) for the CYP2E1 genotype.

Methods: After extraction of DNA from white blood cells, polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment polymorphism methods were used to identify the allelic variants of the three genotypes.

Results: We found no qualitative or quantitative difference in the mutations underlying the three genetic polymorphisms studied nor in the expected enzymatic phenotypes. Instead, a close parallelism exists between advanced age and younger groups.

Conclusion: Longevity does not seem to be related to any special configuration of these three polymorphic traits. Comparisons with younger controls may be adequate when studying the distribution of these polymorphisms in diseases affecting old people. No genetically determined differences in the activation of drugs metabolized by these enzymes are to be expected in very old people.

Keywords: longevity, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, NAT2, cytochrome P450, acetylator, polymorphisms

Introduction:

Another possible link between genetic polymorphisms and longevity is the association of several forms of cancer with genetic polymorphisms of enzymes that metabolize carcinogens [6]. There are several genetic polymorphisms inherited as single Mendelian traits that affect the function of enzymes involved in the activation or deactivation of environmental carcinogens. The three polymorphisms studied here have been linked to developing some common types of cancer [6-9], and CYP2D6 is also linked to the risk of early-onset Parkinson's disease [10]. We have studied the distribution of these enzymatic polymorphisms in a group of nonagenarians to see if there are any differences between this group and younger people that would suggest a role in determining human longevity. These factors are under genetic control. Cardiovascular consequences of atherosclerosis and cancer are the two main causes of death in the post-reproductive period. Genetic polymorphisms affecting the structure or function of lipoproteins have been linked to accelerated atherosclerosis and hence to a shorter life expectancy. Modifications in the apo-AI-CIII-AIV cluster [1] may have such an effect; moreover, carriers of the e4 allele of apo E rarely reach advanced ages [2] and show a higher risk of developing Alzheimer's [4]. Genes determining a moderate level of lipoprotein may be related to increased longevity [5].

Patients and Methods:

Forty-one patients over 90 (10 males, mean age years, range 90-98) in good general health, who were free of known malignancies or neurodegenerative diseases, were recruited from the San Carlos University Hospital's Geriatric Unit. The control group for NAT2 and CYP2D6 polymorphisms was 217 healthy subjects (128 males, mean age 36.3 years; SD, 12.7). The control group for CYP2E1 genotype included 137 healthy volunteers (116 males, mean age 32 years; SD, 18.4). All control subjects were of the same ethnic (white Spanish) and geographic (the central area of Spain) origin.

The study was approved by the ethics committee of the San Carlos University Hospital (Madrid), under the guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki. Patients and controls gave informed consent to be included in the study.

Results:

The prevalence of allelic variants (Figure 1), as well as the distribution of acetylator genotypesIt has been suggested that these polymorphisms could modulate the risk of liver cirrhosis in ethanol abusers [21, 22], but this has not been confirmed by us [23]. Figure 2 shows the frequency of major CYP2D6 allelic variants in nonagenarians and in younger controls. The assignment as defective or active alleles has been done according to published studies [13, 15, 25-29]. There is an excess of homozygote CYP2D6 EMs in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma [17], and an excess of phenotypic slow acetylators among urothelioma patients exposed to nitrazepam (NAT2) among others. Taken together, these data suggest that specific combinations of enzymatic polymorphisms could influence the risk of developing some forms of cancer. Nevertheless, patients in this study were not smokers and were not affected by chronic liver disease, which are usually necessary for the development of lung and liver cancers, respectively. Smoking and drinking habits or chronic liver disease are usually incompatible with extreme longevity due to the high risk of death at an earlier age caused by diseases not related to these polymorphisms (atherosclerosis, chronic bronchitis, extrahepatic organic sequelae of alcohol abuse, etc.). The findings obtained in this comparative study make the selection of subjects for control groups easier for studies on diseases affecting people older than 50, as young healthy people are easier to find and recruit. Another point raised by this study is that age-related differences in drug response and toxicity cannot be attributed to a different prevalence of functional genes of the studied drug-metabolizing enzymes, namely CYP2D6, CYP2E1, and NAT2, in very aged people. The genes studied here encode enzymes that are responsible for the metabolism of several drugs. These include tricyclic antidepressants, neuroleptics, beta-blockers and other antiarrhythmics (CYP2D6); paracetamol, chlorzoxazone, and ethanol (CYP2E1) and hydrazines, arylamines, pyrazolones, caffeine, and nitrazepam (NAT2) among others. Any genetic selection in older people would determine differences in the metabolism of these drugs compared with younger subjects.

There are no specific combinations of CYP, E, and NAT genotypes associated with extreme longevity. The distribution of these types is similar in healthy very old people to that of the general population. Other factors, not only genetic but also related to lifestyle, determine the chance of reaching advanced age. It is reasonable to use younger controls when studying the distribution of these polymorphisms in diseases affecting older groups.

References:

1. Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Nordestgaard BG, Gerdes Faergeman O, Humphries SE. Genetic markers in the apo AI-CIU-AIV gene cluster for combined hyperlipidemia, hypertriglyceridemia and predisposition to atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 1993; 100: 157-69.
2. Kervinen K, Savolainen MJ, Salokannel J, et al. Apolipoprotein E and B polymorphisms as longevity factors assessed in nonagenarians. Atherosclerosis 1994; 105: 89-95.
3. Schachter F, Faure-Delanef L, Guenot F, et al. Genetic associations with human longevity at the APOE and ACE Nature Genet 1994; 6: 29-32.
4. Hyman BT, Tanzi R. Molecular epidemiology of Alzheimer's disease. N Engl J Med 1995; 333: 1283-1284.
5. Berg K. Lp(a) lipoprotein: an overview. Chem Phys Lipids 1994; 67-68: 9-16.
6. Caporaso N, Landi MT, Vineis P. Relevance of polymorphisms to human carcinogenesis: evaluation of epidemiologic evidence. Pharmacogenetics 1991; 1: 4-19.
7. Hayashi SI, Watanabe J, Kawajiri K. Genetic isms in 5'-flanking region change transcriptional regulation of the human cytochrome P45OIIE1 gene. J Biochem 1991; 559-65.
8. Guengerich FP, Kin D-H, Iwasaki M. Role of cytochrome P-450 IIE1 in the oxidation of many molecular weight cancer suspects. Chem Res Toxicol 1991; 4: 168-79.
9. Ladero JM, Agundez JAG, Rodriguez-Lescure A, Rubio M, Benitez J. Rsal polymorphism at the P4502E1 and risk of hepatI'm sorry, but there is no text enclosed in ``` ``` for me to process. Please provide the text you would like me to proofread and improve.