Polymorphic variants of Insulin-Like Growth Factor I (IGF-I) Receptor and Phosphoinositide 3-Kinase genes affect IGF-I plasma levels and human longevity: Cues for an evolutionarily conserved mechanism of life span control. Massimiliano Bonafe, Michelangela Barbieri, Francesca Marchegiani, Fabiola Olivieri, Emilia Ragno, Claudia Giampieri, Elena Mugianesi, Matteo Centurelli, Claudio Franceschi, Giuseppe Paolisso and the Department of Experimental Pathology, University of Bologna, 40126 Bologna, Italy; Department of Geriatric Medicine and Metabolic Diseases II, University of Naples (B.M., R.E., P.G.), 80138 Naples, Italy; and Italian National Research Centers on Aging (M.F., O.F., G.C., M.E., C.M.), 60100 Ancona, Italy. Current literature indicates that abrogation of the IGF-I response pathway affects longevity in Caenorhabditis elegans. The down-regulation of IGF-I gene expression is associated with an extension of the lifespan in mice. In this paper, we tested the hypothesis that polymorphic variants of IGF-I response pathway genes, namely IGF-IR (IGF-I receptor; G/A, codon 1013), PI3KCB (phosphoinositide 3-kinase; T/C, 359 bp; A/G, 303 bp), IRS-1 (insulin receptor substrate-1; G/A, codon 972), and FOXO1A (T/C, 97347 bp), play a role in systemic IGF-I regulation and human longevity. The major finding of this investigation was that subjects carrying at least an A allele at IGF-IR have low levels of free plasma IGF-I and are more represented among long-lived people. Moreover, genotype combinations at IGF-IR and PI3KCB genes affect free IGF-I plasma levels and longevity. These findings represent the first indication that free IGF-I plasma levels and human longevity are co-regulated by an overlapping set of genes, contributing to the hypothesis that the impact of the IGF-I/insulin pathway on longevity is a property that has been evolutionarily conserved throughout the animal kingdom. (J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88: 3299-3304, 2003). AKT1/AKT2 kinases affect the lifespan of yeast (8). Based on these data, it has been predicted that genes involved in the insulin/IGF-I response pathway play a role in longevity throughout evolution (9). Mutations in genes that share similarities with human genes involved in the insulin/IGF-I signal response pathway are responsible for an impairment of IGF-I/insulin signaling and for an extension of the Caenorhabditis elegans lifespan (1). In particular, the best-characterized genes of this ancestral IGF-I/insulin response pathway are: DAF-2, ortholog to the human IGF-I/insulin receptor family; AGE-1, ortholog to human p110 catalytic subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase, which is involved in IGF-I/insulin signal transduction; and DAF-16, ortholog to the human FOXO family of Forkhead transcription factors, which regulate IGF-I/insulin-induced changes in gene transcription (25).

A major role of IGF-I in mammalian longevity has been suggested by studies on dwarf mice carrying mutations in transcription factors PIT-1 and PROP-1, which are characterized by a long lifespan and reduced IGF-I plasma levels (10-12). Conversely, transgenic animals with elevated plasma IGF-I levels have a short lifespan (13). In humans, there is evidence that long-lived subjects have decreased plasma IGF-I levels (14, 15) and preserved insulin action compared with aged subjects, thus indicating that an efficient insulin response has an impact on human longevity (16-18). Further recent studies have shown that mutations in the Drosophila melanogaster INR gene (similar to the human insulin receptor) and in the CHICO gene, the ortholog to human insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), the protein associated with the IGF-I/insulin receptor, affect the lifespan, confirming the hypothesis that the insulin/IGF-I response pathway plays a role in the regulation of invertebrate longevity (6, 7).

Based on the above-mentioned literature, we investigated the role of genetic variability at human loci that share similarities with the genes that regulate the insulin/IGF-I response in C. elegans (14) and D. melanogaster. In particular, polymorphisms at IGF-IR (IGF-I receptor; 34% protein sequence identityplasma levels independent of age and gender.

Result presentations. The difference in genotype frequency was analyzed by t-test. For investigating the difference in allele frequency, Fisher's test was used. ANOVA with Scheffe's test was used for comparing IGF-I plasma levels among the genotype groups. A linear general model analysis was used to test the independent contributions of the interactions between the different genotypes as well as the effect of individual genotype on plasma IGF-I levels. A t-test with a Bonferroni-adjusted p-value was used when indicated. Statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS software package (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL). All metabolic parameters are presented as the mean sd.

Analytical methods Anthropometric determinations (weight, height, and BMI) were measured as previously reported (22). Plasma glucose was determined by the glucose oxidase method (Glucose Autoanalyzer, Beckman, Fullerton, CA). Subsequently, centrifugation plasma insulin (Sorin Biomedica, Misuse, Italy; intraassay coefficient of variation, 3.1 0.3%) and free plasma IGF-I levels (Diagnostic Systems Laboratories, Webster, TX; intraassay coefficients of variation, 3.8 0.4%) were determined by RIA.

Results In the entire population, free IGF-I plasma levels displayed an age-related decrease (Fig. 1) through all ages and were negatively correlated with the degree of IR (HOMA; -0.132). 

Genotype typing In all study groups, the genotype distributions were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P > 0.05). DNA was extracted from white blood cells by phenol/chloroform extraction according to standard procedures (23). The impact of genetic variability at IGF-IR, PIK3CB, IRS-1, and FOXO1A loci on plasma IGF-I levels was tested by univariate analysis (Table 1). IGF-IR and PIK3CB genotypes affected IGF-I plasma levels, whereas no change in IGF-I plasma levels was observed according to genotypes of IRS-1 and FOXO1A loci. The gene polymorphism due to a T to C transition located 359 bp upstream from the starting codon of PIK3CB (chromosome 3q22.3, GI: 5453894) was analyzed by the allele refractory method. 

Accordingly, the effects of IGF-IR and PIK3CB polymorphisms on IGF-I plasma levels were assessed by means of a general linear model ANOVA, including age, sex, IR (HOMA), and BMI as covariates (Table 2). The analysis revealed lower free IGF-I plasma levels in IGF1R A allele subjects (AG and AA genotypes) than in G allele subjects (GG genotype) (2.95 2.62 vs. 2.21 2.34 ng/ml; F=6.56; P=0.011) as well as in PIK3CB T allele individuals (TT and TC genotypes) compared with T allele individuals (CC genotypes) (2.22 2.22 vs. 3.02 3.11; F=6.017; P=0.015). Inasmuch as the interaction (IGF-IR PIK3CB) was significant, a univariate two-factor general linear model ANOVA was performed, which revealed that IGF-IR/PIK3CB A/T individuals had the highest IGF-I levels in the population; this was independent of age and gender (A/T vs. all other groups, 4.25 4.03 vs. 2.17 2.31; t=3.63; p=0.005).

The genotype frequency distributions at IGF-IR, PIK3CB, IRS-1, and FOXO1A loci in young people and long-lived people were studied in the two groups. Carriers of the A allele (A subjects) at the IGF-IR locus were more represented among long-lived people than in young people (Table 3). No significant differences were found when PIK3CB, IRS-1, and FOXO1A gene polymorphisms were examined.

Discussion The major findings of this investigation are the following: 1) IGF-I plasma levels, which decrease significantly with age, are affected by the polymorphisms at IGF-IR and PI3CKB genes, both alone and in combination. In particular, individuals bearing at least one A allele at the IGF-IR locus (IGF-IR A) have lower plasma IGF-I levels than the rest of the population. 2) IGF-IR A allele subjects are found in increased proportion in long-livedPlasma levels (with A/T individuals having the highest free IGF-I plasma levels), as well as longevity, showed that the proportion of A/T subjects significantly increased among long-lived individuals. These data suggest that genetic variants of genes involved in the intracellular response to IGF-I (IGF-IR and PI3CKB) jointly affect two phenotypes: free IGF-I plasma levels and longevity. The fact that the two traits are co-regulated by overlapping sets of genes is in line with previous findings on the genetics of longevity in animal models. Indeed, in both invertebrates (C. elegans) and mammals (Mus musculus), the down-regulation of the IGF-I pathway or IGF-I plasma levels is associated with an extension of the lifespan (912, 27), whereas animals with elevated plasma IGF-I levels display a shortened lifespan (13). In humans, the insulin/IGF-I signaling response pathway plays a role in human longevity, indicating that the impact of these genes on species longevity is an evolutionarily conserved property. We hope that our data will be the starting point for future longitudinal studies, including the insulin response pathway genes as a possible trigger for longevity. A hormone is also linked to the development of several diseases, such as cancer (31, 32), but the local expression (bioavailability) of IGF-I may be an important factor contributing to the maintenance of normal tissue function.

To our knowledge, the results reported here are the first findings supporting the hypothesis that genetic variability in the genes responsible for IGF-I regulation plays a role in human longevity. The ortholog of human IGF-IR, DAF-2, is one of the best-characterized longevity genes in C. elegans (13). It has been proposed that DAF-2 mutations lead to the up-regulation of genes involved in heat stress, UV, and antioxidant responses, i.e., pathways that are expected to affect the lifespan in all species (33). Furthermore, it has recently been shown that IGF-IR inactivation prolongs the lifespan in mice and increases their resistance to oxidative stress (34). However, the functional effects of the structural variation in IGF-IR due to the polymorphism studied here are not known.

Acknowledgments: Received November 18, 2002. Accepted April 4, 2003. Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to Giuseppe Paolisso, M.D., Department of Geriatric Medicine and Metabolic Diseases, IV Divisione di Medicina Interna, Piazza Miraglia 2, I-80138 Naples, Italy. E-mail: giuseppe.paolisso@unina2.it. The EU Projects (PROTAGE, FUNCTIONAGE, and ECHA) and References Vanfleteren JR, Braeckman BP. Mechanisms of lifespan determination in Caenorhabditis elegans. Neurobiol Aging; Kimura KD, Tissenbaum HA, Liu Y, Ruvkun G. Daf-2, an insulin receptor-like gene that regulates longevity and diapause in Caenorhabditis elegans. Science; Li Y, Dorma B, Roda R. Kenyon C. Daf-2: a NF-kappaB/ forkhead family member that can function to double the lifespan of Caenorhabditis elegans. Science; Tissenbaum HA, Ruvkun G. An insulin-like signaling pathway affects both longevity and reproduction in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics; Henderson ST, Johnson TE. Daf-16 integrates developmental and environmental inputs to mediate aging in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Curr Biol; Clancy DJ, Gems D, Harshman LG, Oldham S, Stocker H, Hafen E, Leevers SJ, Partridge L. Extension of life-span by loss of CHICO, a Drosophila insulin receptor substrate protein. Science; Steger RW, Bartke A, Cecim M. Premature aging in transgenic mice expressing different growth hormone genes. J Reprod Fertil Suppl; Paolisso G, Gambardella A, Balbi V, Ammendola S, D'Amore A, M. Body composition, body fat distribution, and resting metabolic rate in healthy centenarians. Am J Clin Nutr; Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T (eds). Molecular cloning: a manual. 2nd Ed. Cold Spring Harbor: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory; Kossila M, Sinkovic M, Karkkainen PI, Laukkanen MO, Miettinen R, Vesanen J, Kekalainen P, Kuusisto J, Yla-Herttuala S, Laakso M. Cloning of a novel phosphatidylinositol Rose G, De Benedictis G. Low insulin resistance and preserved beta-cell function contribute to human longevity but are not associated with TH-INS genes. Exp Gerontol. 2006;41(4): 315-319.

Thatcher AR, Kannisto V, Vaupel JW. The forces of mortality at age 70 to 120. In: Odense Monographs on Population Aging, vol. 5. Odense: Odense University Press; 1998.

Yashin AI, De Benedictis G, Vaupel JW, Tan Q, Andreev KF, Iachine IA, Bonafe` M, De Luca M, Valensin S, Carotenuto L, Franceschi C. Genes, demography and life span: the contribution of demographic data and genetic studies on ageing and longevity. Am J Hum Genet. 1999;65(4): 1178-1193.

Alberti KGMM, Zimmet PZ, for the WHO Consultation. Definition, diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus and its complications. I. Diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus. Provisional report of a WHO consultation. Diabetic Med. 1998;15(7):539-553.