Polygenic Effects of Common Single-Nucleotide Polymorphisms on Lifespan: When Association Meets Causality

Anatoliy I. Yashin, Deqing Wu, Konstantin G. Arbeev, and Svetlana V. Ukraintseva

Abstract

Recently, we showed that the human lifespan is influenced jointly by many common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), each with a small individual effect. Here, we investigate further the polygenic influence on lifespan and discuss its possible biological mechanisms. First, we identified six sets of prolongevity SNP alleles in the Framingham Heart Study 550K SNPs data, using six different statistical procedures (normal linear, Cox and logistic regressions; generalized estimation equation; mixed model; gene frequency method). We then estimated the joint effects of these SNPs on human survival. We found that alleles in each set show a significant additive influence on lifespan. Twenty-seven SNPs comprised the overlapping set of SNPs that influenced lifespan, regardless of the statistical procedure. The majority of these SNPs (74%) were within genes, compared to 40% of SNPs in the original 550K set. We then performed a review of current literature on functions of genes closest to these 27 SNPs. The review showed that the respective genes are largely involved in aging, cancer, and brain disorders. We concluded that polygenic effects can explain a substantial portion of genetic influence on lifespan. The composition of the set of prolongevity alleles depends on the statistical procedure used for the allele selection. At the same time, there is a core set of longevity alleles that are selected with all statistical procedures. The functional relevance of respective genes to aging and major diseases supports causal relationships between the identified SNPs and lifespan. The fact that genes found in our and other genetic association studies of aging/longevity have similar functions indicates high chances of true positive associations for corresponding genetic variants.

Introduction

The criteria for associating a single genetic variant with a trait in GWAS are based on a comparison of p-values resulting from testing the null hypotheses regarding the absence of the variant effect on lifespan, with a threshold that is supposed to take into account the need for multiple comparisons. This typically leads to p-values below 10-7. GWAS of lifespan and other complex traits have shown that such traits can be affected by the joint influence of large numbers of common single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), each having small individual effects and little predictive value. The results of these studies indicate an urgent need for advancing methods of evaluating the joint effects of SNP alleles on aging and longevity and investigating biological mechanisms of such joint influence.

Addressing the joint influence of alleles, each with a small/low significant effect, could help both to significantly improve efficiency in the use of genome-wide SNP data and to explain a substantial part of so-called missing heritability of complex traits, including aging-related ones. Recent GWAS strongly support this idea demonstrating that lifespan and other complex traits, such as height and body mass index (BMI), are significantly influenced by large numbers of jointly acting, common SNPs, each with a small individual effect. However, the SNP alleles in these studies were typically selected using one or two statistical models, which might not be sufficient for meaningful interpretation.

Individual small-effect, low-significance SNP alleles have been observed in many GWAS of complex traits, including lifespan. However, such variants were typically excluded from further analyses. This is because respective studies considered only individual (and not collective) SNP effects on the traits of interest, which required extremely low p-value thresholds to reach a genome-wide significance level for the individual effects. The fact that different statistical models may potentially yield different numbers of SNPs influencing the trait of interest stresses the importance of advancing statistical approaches to analyses of joint genetic effects on aging and longevity. Indeed, the potential influence of a genetic variant on lifespan can be described by not just one but by many different statistical models. The use of different models might result in different estimates of the effect size and in different p-values for the same SNP allele, so that the results of selection (i.e., composition of the set of longevity alleles), and hence conclusions about genetics of lifespan, may depend substantially on the statistical model used in the allele selection procedure. Controlling for different observed covariates may add variability to the results of analyses.

About 9,300 individuals from all generations of the FHS were genotyped for about 550,000 SNPs using Affymetrix 500K (genome-wide) and 50K (enriched with SNPs within genes) mapping arrays, overall representing a significant part of human genome variability. On average, 40% of SNPs were located within genes in the combined 550K set. In this study, we used information about 1,471 genotyped participants of the FHS Original cohort who passed quality control (QCsee that all seven sets of longevity alleles have a significant effect on life span (p<0.001). The polygenic score index for each set of alleles is positively associated with life span, indicating that the more longevity alleles an individual has, the longer their life span is likely to be. The effect sizes of the different sets of alleles vary, with the I-longevity set having the largest effect size (β=0.138), followed by the GEE-longevity set (β=0.135) and the N-longevity set (β=0.125). The smallest effect size was observed for the L-longevity set (β=0.045). These results suggest that multiple genetic variants contribute to life span and that their joint effect can be detected using polygenic scores.signal, the enhancer can increase transcription of the gene containing the intron. 

The review of biological functions of genes closest to the 27 I-longevity SNPs revealed that they are involved in a variety of processes related to aging and health. The most common processes were related to metabolism, including energy metabolism, lipid metabolism, and glucose metabolism. Other processes included neuronal function (such as synaptic plasticity and memory formation), inflammation, detoxification, and replicative senescence. Health outcomes predominantly associated with these genes were cancer and brain disorders. Other (less common and mostly suggestive) associations were with cardiovascular diseases and asthma.

Overall, the findings suggest that the 27 I-longevity alleles jointly influence life span and have potential functional significance in physiological aging and age-related diseases. The fact that the majority of these SNPs are located within genes, particularly intronic regions, supports their potential functional relevance. The biological functions of genes closest to these SNPs are involved in a variety of processes related to aging and health, including metabolism, neuronal function, inflammation, detoxification, and replicative senescence. The associations with specific health outcomes, particularly cancer and brain disorders, suggest that these genes may be important targets for future research on aging and age-related diseases.Transcription factor: the enhancer may increase the level of gene expression several-fold, which in turn will increase the yield of a respective protein. Therefore, polymorphisms in intronic enhancers may potentially significantly affect the balance of protein concentrations, without any changes in the protein structures, thus providing a possible mechanism for their influence on lifespan. To see if this is the case, it is necessary to connect the results of SNP genotyping with the results of the analyses of expression of respective genes and proteins in a further study. Currently, there is indirect evidence in support of such a mechanism. One of the authors of this paper (Dr. Wu), in an earlier work on nematode worms, demonstrated a correlation between levels of gene-protein expression and survival, not related to changes in gene-protein structure (the worms were genetically identical). A review of functions and biological effects (known as well as suggested) of genes closest to the longevity SNPs revealed that biological processes most often associated with these genes are cell growth/proliferation, apoptosis, cell adhesion, and neural activities (such as information processing, response to damage, synaptic discussion). 

Potential mechanisms connecting genes and lifespan: A closer look at findings shown in Tables 3 and 4 allows clarification of important features of mechanisms connecting genes and lifespan. The detected genes are typically multifunctional, with overlapping functions so that each gene can contribute to several cell functions, and each function is supported by several genes. The latter provides support for the polygenic influence with potentially interchangeable and additive effects of the identified SNPs on lifespan. A substantial part of the genes closest to the 27 longevity SNPs (26% of all loci and 35% of the SNPs located within genes) are involved in regulating cell growth/proliferation and apoptosis (Tables 3 and 4). These cell responses and relevant pathways are thought to be key players in physiological aging and linked to the decline in stress resistance. The pathways regulating growth/proliferation and apoptosis are known to be deeply interacting, so that the collective effects of genes involved in relevant pathways on lifespan could be expected. Also, a substantial number of the genes closest to longevity SNPs are involved in cell-cell and focal adhesion (CDH4, SVEP1, NCAM2, RAC2, PARVG, RUNX3). The portion of the SNPs related to the adhesion genes was surprisingly large (22% of all longevity SNPs and 30% of the longevity SNPs located within genes). One of the genes (CDH4) was also identified in an earlier GWAS of brain aging involving Framingham participants. Another one (NCAM2) is a close relative of the NCAM1 neural adhesion gene featured in pathway analysis in the recent GWAS of lifespan by Walter et al.

To understand mechanisms of the influence of cell adhesion genes on lifespan, it is important to stress that these genes may favor longevity through aging as well as cancer-related processes, and this influence may potentially involve significant tradeoffs; e.g., Hong et al. found that cell adhesion genes in mice were overactivated by the aging process, whereas calorie restriction (the only proved senescence-reversing intervention) downregulated them. In summary, this study provides evidence for a polygenic influence on lifespan with the involvement of multiple biological pathways and functional gene groups.cannot be explained by genetic factors alone; environmental and lifestyle factors also play a significant role. However, the identified genes provide valuable insights into the biological processes that promote longevity and may serve as potential targets for interventions to delay aging and age-related diseases. It is important to note that the functional effects of these genes on longevity are complex and may involve trade-offs between different health outcomes. Further research is needed to fully understand the mechanisms underlying the relationship between these genes, aging, and disease.identified by comparing the trait values in monozygotic and dizygotic twins or in other relatives. However, the advent of genomics has enabled researchers to identify specific genetic variants that are associated with complex traits like life span. This has led to the discovery of several longevity-associated SNPs that have additive effects on life span.

One interesting finding is that individuals who live to a very old age tend to have lower rates of cancer, as reported by Newman et al.6. Additionally, about one-third of the genes closest to these longevity SNPs are involved in brain activities that are highly relevant to brain aging and disorders like Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. The mechanisms underlying the prolongevity effects of these genes may involve slower brain aging and decline, as well as trade-offs between genetic factors influencing aging and diseases.

However, there is a risk of false positives when selecting SNP alleles using different statistical models and quality control procedures. Replicating GWAS findings in new studies may also be less reliable and cost-ineffective than testing the roles of detected genes in known metabolic pathways. The multi-factorial nature of complex traits like life span means that different sets of SNP alleles may be associated with life span in different populations.

Despite these challenges, recent studies have demonstrated that a substantial portion of variability in human life span is associated with the additive genetic component. However, it is important to note that the selected longevity SNPs do not exhaust all SNP variants positively influencing life span in a given dataset, and many other genes with small effects may be involved in regulating life span.

In conclusion, while genomics has enabled us to identify specific genetic variants associated with complex traits like life span, it is important to consider the multi-factorial nature of these traits when interpreting GWAS findings and selecting SNP alleles for further study.Characterized by the narrow-sense heritability, i.e., the proportion of phenotypic variance explained by the additive genetic component. Although using today's knowledge about phenotypes (e.g., lifespan) and factors affecting them, mathematical models used for heritability calculations look oversimplified, many conclusions derived from them have important practical meaning. For example, the estimates of heritability have been used to measure selection rate in breeding. The presence of additive genetic effects on phenotypic traits was also one of the key assumptions in evolutionary models of natural selection. However, despite recognition of the importance of additive genetic components in phenotypic variation of complex traits and a number of publications clearly demonstrating the possibility of estimating this component from available genome-wide SNP data, as well as the benefits of using the estimate in analyses of genetic influence on complex traits (e.g., risks of diseases), the potential of this approach for studying lifespan, ages at disease onset, or other health-related durations remains largely underused. The significance level (rs9664222, 6.7710-7) is also involved in regulating cell proliferation (Table 4). In a more recent meta-analysis of nine GWA studies by Walter et al., the authors identified 14 SNPs associated with time to death with a conventional level of significance (p <10-5) and also 862 SNPs with p <10-3 and evaluated biological processes associated with genes closest to these SNPs. Similar to our study, cell adhesion and neuronal activities (e.g., involving NCAM1 and CACNA1C genes) were overrepresented among the relevant processes (Table 4). Taking into account that about 75% of phenotypic variation in lifespan could be due to nongenetic factors and that these factors likely influence traits not directly but through genes involved in various pathways, one should not expect to exactly replicate the effect of a specific SNP allele in other populations. However, the fact that longevity or aging genes identified in different studies often represent the same molecular function, pathway, cell response, or biological process indicates that it may be reasonable to respectively address the issue of replication of gene-longevity associations, i.e., to do it on the level of gene functions, pathways, and their outcomes, rather than on the level of individual SNPs or genes. The set of I-longevity alleles selected in these analyses differs from that selected in our earlier paper, although these sets have nine genetic variants in common. This is likely to be due to the differences in approaches to selecting genetic variants associated with lifespan.

Conclusions
The results of this study stress the importance of using several statistical approaches for identifying alleles in GWAS of complex traits, as well as the importance of using established metabolic pathways involved in the regulation of these traits for confirming research findings. The latter creates an important link between population-based GWAS and the results of experimental studies focused on verifying molecular biological mechanisms, metabolic pathways, and protein interaction networks affecting phenotypic traits. The longevity alleles selected in this study differ from those selected in the studies of Lunetta et al. and Newman et al. discussed above. As results of our study show, one possible reason for this could be differences in the allele selection procedures. The control for observed covariates was also different. In contrast to Newman et al., we did not control for observed covariates that could be considered as mediators of genetic influence on lifespan (e.g., physiological variables) in our study. Although controlling for such covariates may reduce effects of nongenetic factors affecting lifespan through these covariates, it may also reduce the number of selected genetic variants affecting this trait (see also Supplemental Data). The fact that the majority of detected SNPs were located in genes and were intronic indicates a potentially pivotal role of changes in intronic enhancers and in gene/protein expression (not related to the changes in protein structure) in achieving longevity, as compared to the role of the changes in coding exons. This hypothesis needs further testing. The SNPs identified in our study do not have exact overlaps with the SNPs found in other recent GWAS of longevity. While recognizing all the possible statistical reasons for such lack of replication (discussed above), it is important to stress that on the level of gene functions, pathways, cell responses, and health effects, in which the identified SNPs or related genes are involved, there are clear overlaps across respective studies, as well as with many other (not genome-wide) genetic association studies of aging and longevity (Table 4). For example, rs2024714 is one of the 27 I-longevity SNPs, which is located in the intronic region of CDH4, a cell adhesion gene involved in brain information processing and tumor suppression. In an earlier GWAS conducted by Framingham researchers using the Affymetrix 100K SNP array, a polymorphism (rs1970546This text appears to be a list of references. No corrections are necessary.Moosmang S, Haider N, Klugbauer N, et al. Role of hippocampal Cav2+ channels in NMDA receptor-independent synaptic plasticity and spatial memory. J Neurosci; 

ODonovan MC, Craddock NJ, Owen MJ. Genetics of psychosis; insights from views across the genome. Hum Genet; 

Kempton MJ, Ruberto G, Vassos E, et al. Effects of the CACNA2D2 risk allele for bipolar disorder on cerebral gray matter volume in healthy individuals. Am J Psychiatry; 

Deelen J, Beekman M, Uh H-W, et al. Genome-wide association study identifies a single major locus contributing to survival into old age; the APOE locus revisited. Aging Cell; 

Mue M, Vaupel JW, Holm N, Harvald B. Longevity is moderately heritable in a sample of Danish twins born 1870-1900. J Gerontol; 

Herskind AM, Mue M, Holm NV, et al. The heritability of human longevity: A population-based study of Danish twin pairs born 1870-1900. Hum Genet; 

Hill WG, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. Data and theory point to mainly additive genetic variance for complex traits. PLoS Genet; 

Falconer DS, Mackay TFC. Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. Addison Wesley Longman, Harlow, Essex, UK; 

Fisher RA. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford, Clarendon Press; 

Lee SH, Wray NR, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. Estimating missing heritability for disease from genome-wide association studies. Am J Hum Genet; 

Yang J, Lee SH, Goddard ME, Visscher PM. GCTA: A tool for genome-wide complex trait analysis. Am J Hum Genet; 

Visscher PM, Hill WG, Wray NR. Heritability in the genomics era-concepts and misconceptions. Nat Rev Genet; 

Novelli V, Anselmi CV, Roncarati R, et al. Lack of replication of genetic associations with human longevity. Biogerontology; 

Torkamani A, Scott-Van Zeeland AA, Topol EJ, Schork NJ. Annotating individual human genomes. Genomics; 

Tong D-d, Jiang Y, Li M, et al. RUNX3 inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis by TGF-beta-dependent and -independent mechanisms in human colon carcinoma cells. Pathobiology; 

Subramaniam MM, Chan JY, Yeoh KG, et al. Molecular pathology of RUNX3 in human carcinogenesis. Biochim Biophys Acta Rev Cancer; 

Fainaru O, Shseyov D, Hantisteanu S, Groner Y. Accelerated chemokine receptor-mediated dendritic cell migration in Runx3 knockout mice and the spontaneous development of asthma-like disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA; 

Naoe Y, Setoguchi R, Akiyama K, et al. Repression of interleukin-17 in T helper type 1 cells by Runx/Cbf beta binding to the Il17 silencer. J Exp Med; 

Hollingsworth JW, Maruoka S, Boon K, et al. In utero supplementation with methyl donors enhances allergic disease in mice. J Clin Invest; 

Kamide K, Kokubo Y, Yang J, et al. Hypertension susceptibility genes on chromosome 2p24-p25 in a general population. J Hypertens; 

Imada Y, Fujimoto M, Hirata K, et al. Large scale study for asthma in the Japanese population. BMC Notes; 

Guerra-Crespo M, Gleason D, Sistos A, et al. Epidermal growth factor-alpha induces neurogenesis and improvement in a chronic stroke model. 

Cavin LG, Wang F, Factor VM, et al. Transforming growth factor-alpha inhibits the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis through activation of nuclear factor-kappa B in mice. 

Kamide K, Yang J, Matayoshi T, et al. Genetic polymorphisms of L-type calcium channel alpha 1C and alpha 1D subunit genes are associated with sensitivity to the anti-hypertensive effects of L-type dihydropyridine calcium-channel blockers. Circ J; 

Lorber B, Howe ML, Benowitz LI, Irwin N. Mst3b, a Ste20-like kinase, regulates axon regeneration in mature CNS and PNS pathways. Nat Neurosci; 

Zach S, Felk S, Gillardon F. Signal transduction proteinLongevity with IL-G/A and TNF-alpha-G/A polymorphisms. Int J Immunogenet; Taioli E, Mari D, Franceschi C, et al. Polymorphisms of drug-metabolizing enzymes in healthy nonagenarians and centenarians: Differences at GSTT locus. Biochem Biophys Res Commun; Onder G, Capoluongo E, Giovannini S, et al. Interaction between GSTM genotype and IL- on mortality in older adults: Results from the IRENTE study. Cytokine; like kinase regulates axon regeneration in mature CNS and PNS pathways. Nat Neurosci; Zach S, Felk S, Gillardon F. Signal transduction protein analysis links LRRK to Ste kinases and PKC zeta modulate neuronal plasticity. PLoS One; Thalappilly S, Suliman M, Gayet O, et al. Identification multi-SH domain-containing protein interactome in pancreatic cancer: A yeast two-hybrid approach.; Low S-K, Kiyotani K, Mushiroda T, et al. Association of genetic polymorphism in ABCC with induced adverse drug reactions in breast cancer. J Hum Genet; Moyer AM, Sun Z, Batzler AJ, et al. Glutathione genetic polymorphisms and lung cancer survival after platinum-based chemotherapy. Cancer Epidemiol Prev; Cui J, Zhu L, Xia X, et al. NLRC negatively regulates NF-kappa B and type I interferon signaling pathways.; Benko S, Magalhaes JG, Philpott DJ, Girardin SE. Limits the activation of inflammatory pathways. J Andrews GL, Mastick GS. R-cadherin is a growth-promoting cue for pioneer axons. J Kulahin N, Walmod PS. The neural cell adhesion NCAM/OCAM/RNCAM, a close relative to NCAM. Berezin V (ed.). Structure and Function of the Neural Adhesion Molecule. Adv Exp Med Biol; Takahashi S, Kato K, Nakamura K, et al. Neural cell adhesion molecule as a target molecule for prostate and cancer gene therapy. Cancer Sci; Yoshimi R, Yamaji S, Suzuki A, et al. The integrin-linked kinase complex is critically involved in leukocyte-substrate interaction. J Immunol; Lopez-Serra L, Ballestar E, Ropero S, et al. Unmasking epigenetically silenced candidate tumor suppressor genes through removal of methyl-CpG-binding domain proteins.; Tom Tang Y, Emtage P, Funk WD, et al. TAFA: A secreted family with conserved cysteine residues and restricted expression in the brain. Genomics; Guo F, Cancelas JA, Hildeman D, et al. Rac GTPase Rac1 and Rac2 play a redundant and crucial role in development. Blood; Arana E, Vehlow A, Harwood NE, et al. Activation of small GTPase Rac1 via the B cell receptor regulates B cell adhesion and immunological-synapse formation.; Dooley JL, Abdel-Latif D, St Laurent CD, et al. Regulation of inflammation by Rac1 in immune complex-mediated lung injury. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol; Received: August 30, 2011 Accepted: January 15, 2012