Gender-Specific Association Between FSHR and PPARG Common Variants and Human Longevity

Rosa Maria Corbo, Alessandro Pinto, and Renato Scacchi

Abstract

Men and women have different life expectancies. Not unexpectedly, several genes involved in lifespan determination have been found to influence the probability of achieving longevity differently in men and women. This investigation examines the association between longevity and polymorphisms of follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR, Asn680Ser polymorphism) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG, Pro12Ala polymorphism), two genes that previous investigations suggested may exert a gender-specific influence on human longevity. A sample of 277 individuals (mean age, 82.9 ± 5.7 years) was recruited in 2000. Based on mortality data collected in 2009, the sample was divided into two groups of subjects surviving over 90 years (long-lived) or not (controls). The frequency of the FSHR 680 Ser/Ser genotype was significantly higher in the sample of long-lived women compared to controls, indicating that the FSHR 680 Ser/Ser genotype may favor survival to more than 90 years of age only in women (odds ratio [OR] = 4.21; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.10-16.10, p = 0.036). In contrast, the frequency of the PPARG Pro/Ala genotype was significantly higher in the sample of male subjects who died before 90 years of age than in the long-lived, suggesting that carrying the PPARG Pro/Ala genotype may prevent the attainment of advanced age only in men (OR = 0.13; 95% CI, 0.02-0.79; p = 0.03). We then searched the literature for studies reporting a differential role for the genetic component in male and female longevity. To do this, we selected longevity genes with a gender-specific effect. A review of the studies showed that genetic factors tend to have a greater relevance in determining longevity in men than in women. The possible impact of this phenomenon is discussed.

Introduction

Men and women have different life expectancies, which can be traced back across populations at least to the 18th century. Epidemiological data indicate that the higher mortality of men for all leading causes of death, including accidents and such diseases as cancer or heart disease, influenza, and pneumonia, could account for this gender gap in aging. This widespread phenomenon led researchers to investigate the extent to which human aging and longevity depend on genetic factors. Numerous studies using animal models (Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster) have helped to identify longevity genes in the strict sense, i.e., those belonging to pathways that delay the onset and/or reduce the rate of aging (e.g., stress resistance and oxidative damage or inflammation or DNA repair). Studies on human longevity have suggested that some polymorphic genes may influence lifespan through their association with common disease.

Not unexpectedly, among the various genetic factors involved in lifespan determination, some have been found to have a gender-specific effect, influencing the probability of achieving longevity differently between men and women.

In this study, we investigated the possible association between longevity and follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG), two genes that could have a gender-specific influence on human longevity. The FSHR gene (OMIM 136435), located on chromosome 2p21, encodes the receptor of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), a gonadotropin essential for normal reproductive function in males and females. It is a member of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis that regulates the production of sex steroids, including estrogen. Its action is mediated by the FSH receptor, a member of the family of G protein-coupled receptors, located on the surface of Sertoli cells in the testis and the granulosa cells in the ovary.

Much research has gone into attempts to clarify to what extent human aging and longevity are dependent on genetic factors. Numerous studies using animal models (Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila melanogaster) have helped to identify longevity genes in the strict sense, i.e., those belonging to pathways that delay the onset and/or reduce the rate of aging (e.g., stress resistance and oxidative damage or inflammation or DNA repair). Studies on human longevity have suggested that some polymorphic genes may influence lifespan through their association with common disease.

Results

In a previous study on FSHR, we observed an almost complete linkage disequilibrium between the polymorphisms at codon 307 (alleles Thr and Ala) and at codon 680 (alleles Asn and Ser). In the present study,Materials and Methods: 
The sample was recruited in 2000 for the multidisciplinary LONCILE (Longevity of Cilento) study on the anthropological and biological characteristics of the elderly population of the Cilento area in the district of Salerno, southern Italy. It consisted of 277 unrelated individuals (43.7% males) born between 1900 and 1930 (mean age, 82.9±5.7 years standard deviation [SD]), enrolled without selection criteria, except age (> 70 years) and birthplace. Mortality data on 267 subjects were collected in 2009. In 2000, 14.5% were aged 90 years old or older. During the 9-year follow-up period, the mortality rate was 62.5% (51.5 % men); 55.1% of the subjects died before reaching the age of 90 years. As the mean life expectancy in this Italian geographic area for subjects aged 83 years old is 7 years for women and 6 years for men (ISTAT, http://demo.istat.it/unitav/index.html/), we defined as long-lived those subjects who survived to over age 90 years (≥90 years). The sample of the long-lived (n=114) comprised subjects aged 90 years or older in 2000 (regardless of whether the participants were still living or not). Table 1 reports the distribution of the FSHR 680 genotypes in the long-lived and the controls of both sexes. A marginally significant increase (p=0.07) in FSHR 680 Ser/Ser genotype frequency (0.25) was observed in the long-lived women compared to control women (0.08). The crude OR for the probability of surviving to age 90 years or older associated with the FSHR 680 Ser/Ser genotype, calculated only for women, was 3.75 (95% CI 1.00-314.03, p=0.039), suggesting that carrying the FSHR 680 Ser/Ser genotype favors the survival of women to 90 years and older. In contrast, no difference in the FSHR 680 genotype frequencies was observed between the long-lived and the control males. Table Estimates of the Effects of PPARG Pro la Genotypes on the Probability A of Surviving to Age over Years in Men Table and Pro la Genotype 1. FSHR 680 PPARG 12A Distribution in Long-Lived Subjects and Controls Males Females Long-lived Controls Long-lived Controls FSHR 680 No. (%) No. (%) No. (%) No. (%) genotypes Asn/Asn 8 (22) 8 (19) 22 (37) 13 (36) Asn/Ser 20 (54) 24 (59) 22 (37) 20 (56) Ser/Ser 9 (24) 9 (22) 15 (25) 3 (8) p=0.92 0.07 PPARG genotypes Pro/Pro 45 (92) 41 (79) 57 (88) 37 (93) Pro/Ala 3 (6) 11 (22) 7 (11) 3 (8) Ala/Ala 0 0 1 (2) 0 p=0.03,0.62 Variable OR, Odds ratio; CI, confidence interval. In the long-lived men compared to control men, no significant difference in PPARG Pro12Ala genotype frequencies was observed (0.22). The crude OR for the probability of surviving to age 90 years or older associated with the PPARG Pro/Ala genotype, calculated only for men, was 0.248 (95% CI 0.065-0.954), indicating that carrying the PPARG Pro/Ala genotype could limit survival to 90 years or older in men. Conversely, no difference in PPARG Pro12Ala genotype frequencies was observed between the long-lived and the control women. Logistic regression analysis was then applied to the female sample to correctly evaluate the effect of the FSHR 680 Ser/Ser genotype on longevity after adjusting for other covariates. In the analysis, the dependent variable was having survived to age over 90 years or not. Together with the FSHR 680 Ser/Ser genotype, the other explanatory variables were the estrogen receptor-a (ESR1) and aromatase (CYP19) genotypes that, in a previous study on the same sample, were observed to promote longevity in both men and women. Logistic regression analysis was then applied to the male sample to better evaluate the effect of PPARG genotypes on longevity after entering as further covariates the CYP19 and ESR1 genotypes, asage? This study examined the role of two genes, FSHR and PPARG, in longevity and their possible gender-specific effects. The FSHR gene was found to have a significant association with longevity in women, with the Ser/Ser genotype being more common in long-lived women compared to controls. This genotype has also been found to have a protective role against Alzheimer's disease in women. The PPARG Pro/Ala genotype was associated with lower longevity in men, independent of fertility level. However, the PPARG gene may have an age-dependent effect and may be involved in susceptibility to age-related diseases. Overall, there is a growing body of evidence supporting the need to consider gender-specific mechanisms in aging and longevity.Longevity? Italian Multicenter Study on Centenarians (IMUSCE). Aging;  Passarino G, Montesanto A, Dato S, Giordano S, Domma F, Mari V, Feraco E, De Benedictis G. Sex and age specificity of susceptibility genes modulating survival at old age. Hum Hered;  By comparison, genes associated with female longevity are not only fewer but tend to be more heterogeneous in function as well: some are involved in the basic pathways of aging, such as immune function and inflammation, others possibly involved in fertility or susceptibility to postmenopausal diseases (FSHR), and still others that preserve a healthy status during the reproductive years, thus favoring Corbo RM, Ulizzi L, Piombo L, Scacchi R. Study on a possible effect of four longevity candidate genes (ACE, PPAR-c, and APOE) on human fertility.;  Capri M, Salvioli S, Monti D, Caruso C, Candore G, Vasto Olivieri F, Marchegiani F, Sansoni P, Baggio G, Mari Passarino G, De Benedictis G, Franceschi C. Human longevity within an evolutionary perspective: the paradigm of a post-reproductive genetics. Exp;  De Rango F, Dato S, Bellizzi D, Rose G, Marzi E,L., Franceschi C,Skytthe A,Jeu ne B,Cournil A,Gampe J,Vaupel JW,Mari V,Feraco E,Passarino G,Velletto A, De Benedictis G. A novel sampling design to explore gene-longevity associations: the ECHA study. Eur Hum Genet.;  Rendina D,Gianfrancesco F,D e Filippo G,M erlotti Esposito T,Mingione A, Nuti R,Strazzullo P,Mossetti Gennari L. FSHR gene polymorphisms influence bone mineral density and bone turnover in postmenopausal Eur J Endocrinol;  Lussiana C, Guani B,Mari C,Restagno G,Massobrio Revelli A. Mutations and polymorphisms of the FSH receptor (FSHR) gene: Clinical implications in female fertility and molecular biology of FSHR protein and Obstet Gynecol Surv;  Penn DJ, Smith KR. Differential fitness costs of reproduction between the sexes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA;  Gagnon A, Smith KR, Tremblay M, Vezina H,Pare Desjardins B. Is there a trade-off between fertility and longevity? A comparative study of women from three historical databases accounting for mortality selection. Am Hum Biol.;  Le Bourg E. Does reproduction decrease longevity in beings? Ageing Res Rev;  Westendorp RG, Kirkwood TB. Human longevity at the cost of reproductive success. Nature;  Korpelainen H. Fitness, reproduction and longevity in European aristocratic and rural Finnish families in 1800s and 1900s. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci;  Chung JH, Seo AY, Chung SW,Kim MK,Leeuwenburgh Yu BP, Chung HY. Molecular mechanism of PPAR in regulation of age-related inflammation. Ageing Res;  Deeb SS,Fajas L,Nemoto M,Pihlajamaki J,Mykkanen Kuusisto J,Laakso M,Fujimoto W,Auwerx J.Pro12Ala substitution in PPARGamma is associated with decreased receptor activity, lower body mass index and improved insulin sensitivity. Nat Genet;  Altomare K,Greco V,Bellizzi D,Berardelli M,Dato S,Rango F,Garasto S,Rose G,Feraco E,Mari V,Passarino Franceschi C and De Benedictis G. The -174G/C allele in promoter region of the HSP70-1 gene is unfavorable for human longevity. Biogerontology;  Singh R,Klvraa S,Bross P,Christensen K,Gregersen Tan Q,Jensen UB,Eiberg H,Rattan SI. Heat-shock protein 70 genes and human longevity: A view from Denmark. NY Acad Sci;  Singh R,Klvraa S,Bross P,Christensen K,Bathum Gregersen N,Tan Q,Rattan SI. Anti-inflammatory heat shock protein 70 genes are positively associated with survival. Curr Pharm Des;  Simoni M,Nieschlag E,Gromoll J. Isoforms and single nucleotide polymorphisms of the FSH receptor gene: implications for human reproduction. Hum Reprod;  Corbo RM,Gambina G,Broggio E,Scacchi R. Influence of variation in the follicKhabour OF, Mesmar FS, Alatoum MA, Gharaibeh MY, Alzoubi KH. Associations of polymorphisms in adiponectin and leptin genes with men's longevity. Aging Male; : 

Nebel A, Flachsbart F, Till A, Caliebe A, Blanche H, Arlt A, Hasler R, Jacobs G, Kleindorp R, Franke A, Shen B, Nikolaus S, Krawczak M, Rosenstiel P, Schreiber S. A functional EXO promoter variant is associated with prolonged life expectancy in centenarians. Mech Ageing Dev; :

Li Y, Wang WJ, Cao H, Lu J, Wu C, Hu FY, Guo J, Zhao L, Yang F, Zhang YX, Li W, Zheng GY, Cui H, Chen X, Zhu Z, He H, Dong B, Mo X, Zeng Y and Tian XL. Genetic association of FOXO A and FOXO A with longevity trait in Han Chinese populations. Hum Mol Genet; :

Van Heemst D., Beekman M., Mooijaart S.P., Heijmans B.T., Brandt B.W., Zwaan B.J., Slagboom P.E., Westendorp R.G. Reduced insulin/IGF signalling and human longevity. Aging Cell; :

Lio D., Scola L., Crivello A., Bonafe M., Franceschi C., Olivieri F., Colonna-Romano G., Candore G. and Caruso C. Allele frequencies of +T/A single nucleotide polymorphism at the EXO1 gene in an Italian population sample. Mech Ageing Dev; :

Rosa Maria Corbo La Sapienza University Department of Biology and Biotechnology Piazzale A. Moro Rome E-mail: rosamaria.corbo@uniroma1.it