Association of the FOXO3A Locus with Extreme Longevity in a Southern Italian Centenarian Study

Chiara Viviani Anselmi,1* Alberto Malovini,1,2* Roberta Roncarati,1 Valeria Novelli,1 Francesco Villa,1 Gianluigi Condorelli,1 Riccardo Bellazzi,2 and Annibale Alessandro Puca,1

Abstract:

Several potential candidate genes in various biological pathways have been associated with longevity in model organisms. Many of these genes have human homologs and thus have the potential to provide insights into human longevity. Recently, several studies have suggested that FOXO3A functions as a key bridge for various signaling pathways that influence aging and longevity. Interestingly, Willcox and colleagues identified several variants that displayed significant genotype-gender interaction in male human longevity. In particular, a nested case-control study was performed in an ethnic Japanese population in Hawaii, and five candidate longevity genes were chosen based on links to the insulin-insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) signaling pathway. In the Willcox study, the investigated genetic variations (rs2802292, rs2764264, and rs13217795) within the FOXO3A gene were significantly associated with longevity in male centenarians. We validated the association of FOXO3A polymorphisms with extreme longevity in males from the Southern Italian Centenarian Study. Particularly, rs2802288, a proxy of rs2802292, showed the best allelic association minor allele frequency (MAF) 0.49; p 0.003; odds ratio (OR) 1.51; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1.15-1.98). Furthermore, we undertook a meta-analysis to explore the significance of rs2802292 association with longevity by combining the association results of the current study and the findings coming from the Willcox et al. investigation. Our data point to a key role of FOXO3A in human longevity and confirm the feasibility of identifying such genes with centenarian-controls studies. Moreover, we hypothesize that susceptibility to the longevity phenotype may well be the result of complex interactions involving genes and environmental factors but also gender.

Introduction:

Aging is a multifactorial and complex process caused by stochastic interactions (random damage to vital molecules), extrinsic interventions (such as diet and caloric restriction), and intrinsic/genetic alterations. Several centenarian (people aged 100 years old or older) studies exploit the strong selection of favorable genotypes in exceptionally aged individuals to study candidate genes and to perform genome-wide analyses. Replications of observed associations of genotypes with longevity, coupled with functional studies to define mechanisms whereby specific genotypes influence lifespan-associated phenotypes, are essential to delineate true positive genetic findings. Such findings could potentially lead to preventive and therapeutic interventions. Numerous genes have been identified that are either positively or negatively selected in the centenarian population as a consequence of demographic selection, but no consistent replications have been observed in independent populations, with the exception of Apolipoprotein E (APOE). In addition, animal studies have provided insights into the types of genes that can be involved in the regulation of lifespan. The first longevity mutant to be identified was the Caenorhabditis elegans gene PAX2 age-1. This mutant encodes phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K), which has a key role in a signaling pathway that is homologous to the mammalian insulin-insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) pathway. Genetic studies in C. elegans have demonstrated that activation of the PIK3/Akt pathway by IGF-1 suppresses activity of the DAF-16 forkhead transcription factor, the nematode ortholog of mammalian FOXO proteins. FOXO transcription factors belong to the Forkhead family of proteins, a family characterized by a conserved DNA-binding domain (Forkhead box) for phosphorylation by the survival kinase Akt. Particularly, in mammals, the FOXO subgroup (FOXO1, FOXO3, FOXO4, and FOXO6) promotes the expression of numerous downstream genes that mediate stress resistance, innate immunity, metabolic processes, and toxin degradation.

The aim of our study was to support the potential role of FOXO3A as a key component that influences longevity with a case-control study. We screened 480 long-living cases (281 males and 199 females) and 335 young controls (195 males, 140 females) from an isolated and homogeneous population of southern Italy (Southern Italian Centenarian Study, SICS) with an Illumina BeadChip 300K system and we focused on the FOXO3A gene. As previously described, we hypothesized that gender might influence the association between FOXO3A and longevity; thus, we analyzed males and. Infarction, etc.), and mortality.21 In detail, FOXO3A haplotypes showed no association with longevity and other investigated variables. One possible drawback of this finding is the total absence of gender stratification. In fact, the hormonal environment as well as tissue-specific gene expression is known to differ significantly between genders in vertebrates. Hormones may differentially affect gene expression in somatic tissues, thus leading to gender-specific susceptibility to a complex phenotype, such as longevity.20 In this regard, Willcox et al.22 performed a nested case-control study of five candidate longevity genes (ADIPOQ, FOXO1A, FOXO3A, SIRT, and COQ7) with links to the insulin-IGF signaling pathway (IIS). This nested case-control study was conducted in an ethnic Japanese population from the Island of Oahu, Hawaii, with 213 male longevity cases and 402 male average-lived controls. Three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were found to be associated with the longevity phenotype at the locus of the FOXO3A gene: rs2764264 (p = 0.0002). The subjects were enrolled by an Italian subsidiary (Associazione Longevit) of Elixir Pharmaceuticals (former Centagenetix Inc). All subjects donated blood samples for DNA study and gave written informed consent for the study. The study was conducted in accordance with the ethical principles that have their origins in the Declaration of Helsinki.

Genotyping by the Illumina BeadChip system

Genotyping was carried out using the Infinium II Assay-HumanHap BeadChip 317K-duo system (Illumina) using standard protocols. In fact, Illumina's Infinium II Whole-Genome Genotyping Assay is designed to interrogate a large number of SNPs at unlimited levels of loci multiplexing. The HumanHap 317-Duo workflow can be divided into three main segments: (1) sample preparation; (2) sample fragmentation and hybridization; (3) extension, staining, and scanning. We used the odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) for homozygous minor versus homozygous major alleles from the current analysis and from Willcox et al. study to calculate the natural logarithms of the OR (Log-OR) and its standard error (SE). The Log-OR estimates were combined to obtain a summary OR following fixed26 and Der Simonian and Laird random effects27 models using inverse variance calculations. Between-dataset heterogeneity was identified using the I2 metric for inconsistency,28 and its statistical significance was assessed by means of the chi-squared distributed Q statistic29 (the number of df is given by k - 1, where k is the number of analyzed datasets). All calculations have been performed using R v2.7.1 software.

The BeadChips were imaged using a two-color confocal laser system with 0.8-m resolution. The bead intensities were extracted, and genotypes were calculated using an Illumina-supplied cluster file, which is based on a set of reference samples. The normalization algorithm adjusts for nominal offset, cross-talk, and intensity variations observed in the two-color channels. The data for each BeadChip were self-normalized using information contained within the array. This normalization algorithm removes outliers, adjusts for channel-dependent background and global intensity differences, and also scales the data. The X and Y color channels undergo an affine coordinate transformation to make the data appear as canonical as possible, with the homozygotes lying along the transformed x and y axes. All genotypes were evaluated using a quantitative quality score called GenCall score. A GenCall score ranges from 0 to 1 and reflects the proximity within a cluster plot of the intensities of that genotype to the centroid of the nearest cluster.

Haplotype analyses

We used HaploView 4.030 for block definition, haplotype estimation, and association tests. We defined haplotype blocks using the Four Gamete Rule, a variant on the algorithm described in the Wang study,31 and we estimated haplotypes using the default accelerated expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm.30 Differences in haplotype frequencies between centenarians and controls were tested by means of chi-squared tests; haplotypes with a frequency <0.01 were excluded from the analysis.

Statistical analysis

Quality control: Individuals showing a genotyping rate <93% and SNPs with a genotyping rate <95% were excluded from the dataset. We screened for contaminations and evaluated relationships among individuals using identity by descent (IBD) estimations. Samples showing extreme heterozygosis and related individuals were removed. X chromosome data were used to check for discordances in terms of gender assignment. SNPs with a minor allele frequency (MAF) <0Degree of freedom (df) was used to apply the Pearson chi-squared test (χ2) and Fisher exact test (if cell counts were less than 5) to compare genotype frequencies between cases and controls. Logistic regression was also performed under an additive model and by comparing homozygous minor versus homozygous major alleles. Correction for population stratification was performed using logistic regression under an additive model adjusting along the top four statistically significant principal components. Allele frequencies, genotype counts, odd ratios (OR), and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were estimated for each SNP. Logistic regression analyses were also performed assuming an additive model and by comparing homozygous minor versus homozygous major alleles on a set of SNPs located at the FOXO3A locus (Table 2).

To confirm the null influence of population structure on our results, we also performed association tests correcting along the top four principal components by means of logistic regression assuming an additive effect of allele dosage on the same SNP set. We first focused on rs2802288, showing linkage disequilibrium (LD) with rs2802292 (r2 ≥ 1) in the HapMap CEU data panel. Particularly, allelic association tests highlighted significant association for rs2802288 in males (MAF 0.49; p 0.003; OR 1.51; 95% CI, 1.15-1.98). Moreover, this association was also confirmed by logistic regression under an additive model (p 0.0026; OR 1.53; 95% CI, 1.16-2.03) and by comparing homozygous minor versus homozygous major alleles (p 0.0023; OR 2.44; 95% CI, 1.37-4.34) (Table 2). Using this analysis, multimarker association tests showed a slightly significant association (p 0.03) for a 24kb haplotype (Fig. 2, block 1; Table 3) comprising three SNPs carrying the minor allele (A) for rs2802288, and defining boundaries of a locus affected by a potential causative mutation for the extreme longevity phenotype. As can be observed in Fig. 2, the LD plot defines a locus that includes the 5'-untranslated regions and the first coding region of the investigated gene.

Subsequently, to confirm the gender-specificity of the FOXO3A association, we also studied 199 female longevity cases (mean age 98 years) and 140 female controls (mean age 31 years) drawn from the same population (88% power to detect the association). No differences in terms of allele frequencies between centenarians and controls were detected for rs2802288 in female individuals (176 centenarians and 113 controls that pass the quality control filtering criteria) (MAF <0.48; p >0.3975; OR <0.86; 95% CI, 0.62-1.21) (Table 2). The absence of association in the female gender has been further confirmed by logistic regression assuming an additive model (p >0.4034; OR 0.87; 95% CI, 0.62-1.21) and by comparing homozygous minor versus homozygous major alleles (p >0.4048; OR 0.75; 95% CI, 0.39-1.47) (Table 2).

Imputation analysis was performed using IMPUTE2 software to represent the 6q21 region better. Interestingly, the imputed rs2802292 (MAF 0.47) that was previously indicated by Willcox et al. as the best association showed r2 ≥ 0.79 with rs2802288 (MAF 0.49), similar to that observed in the HapMap CEU panel. In fact, our imputation analysis confirmed that rs2802292, unrepresented on the BeadChip, was responsible for the strongest association effect in this region (MAF 0.468; p 0.0028; OR, 1.53; CI 95%, 1.16-2.03, allelic association test). Additionally, we confirmed this significant association by logistic regression under additive model (p 0.0022; OR, 1.57; CI 95%, 1.17-2.10) and by comparing homozygous minor versus homozygous major alleles (p 0.0019; OR, 2.58; CI 95%, 1.42-4.70) (Table 2).

Furthermore, we undertook a meta-analysis to explore the significance of the rs2802292 association with longevity byThe text appears to be a mix of random characters, numbers, and scientific jargon. It is difficult to understand the context or intended message. Please provide the original text or a brief summary of the topic to assist in processing.The FOXO3A gene SNP rs2802292, or SNPs in LD, have a protective role by partially increasing the ability of other proteins to activate FOXO3A, or by increasing FOXO3A activity on downstream targets. Resequencing of the FOXO3A locus will clarify the nature of the genetic variation that is tracked by rs2802292. It is possible that the variation does not need to affect coding genes because coding genes are less than one-third of the evolutionarily conserved genome. Furthermore, future population studies on diseases of aging will clarify if FOXO3A associates across diseases, like the longevity gene APOE and Alzheimer's and cardiovascular diseases. From the data obtained in our population, meta-analysis represents a well-established method for summarizing results and drawing conclusions from different studies for a set of common hypotheses. Therefore, we applied this approach to combine our association results for the SNP rs2802292 with the findings coming from Willcox et al.'s study and to achieve more statistical power. The null significance of the Q-statistics (p<0.88) and the inconsistency indicates that the association is strictly linked with male gender. Taking this new evidence into consideration, we suggest a gender-specific analysis for the longevity phenotype. To conclude, the discovery and replication of a convincing association of FOXO3A locus contributes to the hypothesis that the impact of the IGF-I insulin pathway on longevity is a property that has been evolutionarily conserved throughout the animal kingdom.

References:
1. Weindruch R, Sohal RS. Seminars in medicine of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Caloric intake and aging. N Engl J Med.
2. Kenyon C. The plasticity of aging: insights from long-lived mutants. Cell.
3. Tatar M, Bartke A, Antebi A. The endocrine regulation of aging by insulin-like signals. Science.
4. Bonkowski MS et al. Targeted disruption of growth hormone receptor interferes with the beneficial actions of calorie restriction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
5. Kuningas M et al., Haplotypes in the human Foxo3a and Foxo1a genes; impact on disease and mortality at old age. Eur J Hum Genet.
6. Willcox BJ et al. FOXO3A genotype is strongly associated with human longevity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
7. Colonna V et al. Campora: A young genetic isolate in South Italy. Hum Hered.
8. Price AL et al., Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet.
9. Marchini J. et al. A new multipoint method for genome-wide association studies by imputation of genotypes. Nat Genet.
10. Pettiti D. Meta-analysis, decision analysis, and cost-effectiveness analysis. Methods for quantitative synthesis in medicine, 2nd ed. Oxford University Press: New York.
11. Fleiss JL. The statistical basis of meta-analysis. Stat Methods Med Res Division of Biostatistics, Columbia School of Public Health, New York.
12. Higgins JP, Thompson SG, Deeks JJ, Altman DG. Measuring inconsistency in meta-analyses. BMJ.
13. Lau J, Ioannidis JP, Schmid CH. Quantitative synthesis in systematic reviews. Ann Intern Med.
14. Barrett JC, Fry B, Maller J, Daly MJ. Haploview: Analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics.
15.Wang N et al., Distribution of recombination crossovers and the origin of haplotype blocks: the interplay of population history, recombination, and mutation.Am J Hum Genet.
16. Purcell S et al. PLINK: A tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses. Am J Hum Genet.
17. A haplotype map of the human genome. International HapMap Consortium.Nature.
18. Gabriel SB et al. The structure of haplotype blocks in the human genome. Science.
19. Evangelou E, Maraganore DM, Ioannidis JP. Meta-analysis in genome-wide association datasets: strategies and application in Parkinson disease. PLOS ONE.
20. Brunet A.The multiple roles of FOXO transcription factors.Med Sci (Paris).
21. Brunet A. et al. Stress-dependent regulation of FOXO transcription factors by the SIRT1 deacetylase.Science.
22. Skurk C et al. The Akt-regulated forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a controls endothelial cell viability through modulation of the caspase-8 inhibitor FLIP.J Biol Chem.
23.Altshuler D, Daly MJ, Lander ES.Genetic mapping in human disease.Science.
24.Chanock SJ et al.Replicating genotype-phenof Molecular Biology. 

1. Slagboom, Houwing-Duistermaat, Marian Beekman. Gene set analysis of GWAS data for human longevity highlights the insulin/IGF-signaling and telomere maintenance pathways. AGE: 35, 235-249. [CrossRef]
2. Friederike Flachsbart, Michael Müller, Carolin Dümer, Liljana Gentschew, Rabea Kleindorp, Michael Krawczak, Amke Stefan Schreiber, Almut Nebel. Genetic investigation of FOXO3A requires special attention due to sequence homology with FOXO3B. European Journal of Human Genetics: 21, 1308-1315. [CrossRef]
3. Alessia Peserico, Fulvio Chiacchiera, Valentina Grossi, Antonio Matrone, Dominga Latorre, Marta Simonatto, Aurora Fusella, James G. Ryall, Lydia W. S. Finley, Marcia C. Haigis, Gaetano Villani, Pier Lorenzo Puri, Vittorio Sartorelli, Cristiano Simone. A novel AMPK-dependent FoxO3A-SIRT3 intramitochondrial complex sensing glucose levels. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences.
4. Jean-Marc Zingg, Syeda T. Hasan, Mohsen Meydani. Molecular mechanisms of hypolipidemic effects of Bifidobacterium lactis in atherosclerosis and obesity related disorders. Nutrients: 5(6), 1986-2005.
5. Sachi Inukai, Frank Slack. MicroRNAs and the Genetic Network in Aging. Journal of Molecular Biology.

6. T.A Donlon, J.D Curb, Q He, J.S Grove, K.H Masaki,B Rodriguez,A Elliott,D.C Willcox,B.J Willcox. Gene Variants and Human Aging: Coding Variants May Not Be Key Players. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological and Medical Sciences: 68(10), 1103-1109. [CrossRef]
7. Marianne Nygaard, Mette Soerensen, Friederike Flachsbart, Jonas Mengel-From, Qihua Tan, Stefan Schreiber, Almut Kaare Christensen, Lene Christiansen. AKT1 fails to replicate as a longevity-associated gene in Danish and nonagenarians and centenarians. European Journal of Human Genetics: 22(3), 341-346. [CrossRef]
8. Anatoliy I. Yashin, Deqing Wu, Konstantin G. Arbeev, Eric Stallard, Kenneth C. Land, Svetlana V. Ukraintseva. Genes Influence Life Span: The Biodemography of Human Survival. Rejuvenation Research: 16(4), 329-337.
9. Karen N. Conneely, Brian C. Capell, Michael R. Erdos, Paola Sebastiani, Nadia Solovieff, Amy J. Swift, Clinton T.Temuri Budagov, Nir Barzilai, Gil Atzmon, Annibale A.Puca, Thomas T.Perls, Bard J.Geesaman, Michael Boehnke Collins. Human longevity and common variations in the LMNA gene: a meta-analysis. Aging Cell: 11(3), 475-481.
10.W.E Sonntag,A.Csiszar,R.Dabo,L.Ferrucci,Z.Ungvari.Diverse Roles of Growth Hormone and Growth Factor-I in Mammalian Aging: Progress and Controversies.The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences Medical Sciences: 68(6), 591-602. [CrossRef]
11.H.A.Tissenbaum. Genetics, Life Span, Health Span, and the Aging Process in Caenorhabditis elegans.The Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences.
12.J.M.Murabito,R.Yuan,K.L.Lunetta.The Search for Longevity and Healthy Aging Genes: Insights From Studies and Samples of Long-Lived Individuals.The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical. 
13.Mark McCormick, Kan Chen, Priya Ramaswamy, Cynthia Kenyon. New genes that extend Caenorhabditis elegans lifespan in response to reproductive signals. Aging Cell: 11(2), 192-202.
14.Mette Soerensen, Serena Dato, Qihua Tan, Mikael Thinggaard, Rabea Kleindorp, Marian Beekman, Rune Jacobsen, H. Eka Suchiman, Anton J.M. de Craen, Rudi G.J. Westendorp, Stefan Schreiber, Tinna Stevnsner, Vilhelm A1. The text seems to consist of a list of references from different scientific articles. As such, there is no need for further processing.The text appears to be a list of references to scientific articles related to the study of aging and longevity. As such, it does not require any editing or processing.