Human longevity and variation in DNA damage response and repair: a study of the contribution of sub-processes using competitive gene-set analysis.

Birgit Debrabant*,1,8, Mette Sørensen*,1,2,8, Friederike Flachsbart3, Serena Dato4, Jonas Mengel-From1,2, Tinna Stevnsner5, Vilhelm A Bohr5,6, Torben A Kruse2, Stefan Schreiber3, Almut Nebel3, Kaare Christensen1,2,7, Qihua Tan1,2 and Lene Christiansen1,2.

DNA damage response and repair are crucial to maintaining genetic stability and are consequently considered central to aging and longevity. Here we investigate whether this pathway generally associates with longevity and whether specific sub-processes are more strongly associated with longevity than others. Data were applied to 592 SNPs from 77 genes involved in nine sub-processes: DNA damage response, base excision repair (BER), nucleotide excision repair, mismatch repair, non-homologous end-joining, homologous recombinational repair (HRR), RecQ helicase activities (RECQ), telomere functioning and mitochondrial DNA processes. The study population consisted of 1089 long-lived and 736 middle-aged Danes. A self-contained set-based test of all SNPs displayed association with longevity (P-value 9.9 x 10^-5), supporting the idea that the overall pathway could affect longevity. Investigation of the nine sub-processes using the competitive gene-set analysis by Wang et al indicated that BER, HRR and RECQ were more strongly associated with longevity than the respective remaining genes of the pathway (P-values 0.004-0.048). For HRR and RECQ only one gene contributed to the significance whereas for BER several genes contributed. These associations did not, however, generally pass correction for multiple testing. Still, these findings indicate that of the entire pathway, variation in BER might influence longevity the most. These modest-sized P-values were not replicated in a German sample. This might, though, be due to differences in genotyping procedures and investigated SNPs, potentially inducing differences in the coverage of gene regions. Specifically, five genes were not covered at all in the German data. Therefore, investigations in additional study populations are needed before a final conclusion can be drawn.

European Journal of Human Genetics advance online publication, 12 February 2014; doi:10.1038/ejhg.2013.299

Keywords: competitive gene-set analysis; human longevity; SNPs; case-control data; DNA damage response and repair

INTRODUCTION

It has been estimated that about 25% of the variation in human lifespan is caused by genetic factors1, a contribution which is likely to be minimal before age 60 years and most pronounced from age 85 years onwards.2 Candidate longevity genes encode proteins involved in several biological processes including DNA damage response and DNA repair,3 which are essential for cellular function due to the constant exposure of living cells to various kinds of endogenous and exogenous agents. Such agents can damage diverse cellular components, including the DNA, and potentially induce genomic instability or mutagenesis. To maintain the integrity of the genome, DNA damage response processes detect the DNA lesions and activate cell cycle arrest and DNA repair processes.4 The DNA repair processes each repair a certain subset of DNA lesions: base excision repair removes single-base lesions (eg oxidative lesions induced by reactive oxygen species (ROS)); nucleotide excision repair operates on bulky lesions (eg induced by UV light); mismatch repair among other repair errors arising during DNA replication while double-strand break repair (DSB) removes DSB breaks and complex lesions (eg induced by ionizing radiation or chemotherapeutics). DSB is divided into homologous recombinational repair and non-homologous end-joining. The RecQ helicases are, among other things, important for ensuring the proper structure of the DNA helix during DNA repair.8 Severe mutations in two of the RecQ helicase genes, WRN and RECQL4, can cause Werner and Rothmund-Thomson premature aging syndromes, respectively.9,10 Additional mechanisms affect the stability of the chromosome ends, the telomeres. Telomeres undergo shortening with every replication cycle in cells lacking telomerase until the telomeres reach a critical length at which the cell enters cellular senescence.11,12 Telomere shortening is associated with organismal aging; in humans, leukocyte telomere length is inversely related to age13,14 and is associated with an increased risk of age-related disease and with higher mortality.15-18 Finally, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is exposed to specifically high levels of ROS due to its vicinity to oxidative phosphorylation and is thus potentially exposed toresponse and repair genes is associated with human longevity. We used a combined analysis of sets of SNPs and genes to reduce the multiple testing burden and increase power. DNA was isolated from blood spot cards or full blood using QIAamp DNA Kits, and genotyping of all samples was performed on the Illumina GoldenGate platform. Data cleaning was done to exclude samples and SNPs with low call rates, close clusters, clusters of low intensity, heterozygote cluster shifting towards a homozygote cluster, excess heterozygosity, and SNPs located on the X chromosome. Overall, 8.8% of the individuals and 10.4% of the SNPs were excluded, leaving data on 592 SNPs in 77 genes from 1089 oldest-old and 736 controls.

The study focused on common variation in 77 DNA-damage response and repair genes composing nine sub-processes. The association of the overall pathway with longevity was investigated first, followed by a gene-set method put forward by Wang et al to test whether any of the sub-processes is more associated with longevity than the other sub-processes. The analyses were carried out in a study population of 1089 oldest-old and 736 middle-aged Danes, whereas replication was done in a German study population of 763 long-lived individuals and 1085 controls.

A set-based analysis of all SNPs was performed using the most inclusive settings, and single-marker P-values were summarized by the overall mean of all SNPs to estimate the average association of the entire SNP-set with longevity. Significance was determined by permuting the phenotype labels 10000 times. A gene-set analysis using the competitive gene-set enrichment method published by Wang et al was also performed in four steps.

The set-based test resulted in an overall P-value supporting that variation in DNA-damage response and repair genes appears to be important for human longevity. The competitive gene-set analysis showed that the sub-processes BER, HRR, and RECQ had P-values below 0.05, whereas the remaining sub-processes were non-significant. However, only HRR showed a q-value below 0.05 and only in setup II.

In conclusion, this study suggests that genetic variation in sub-processes of DNA-damage response and repair genes may play a role in human longevity. Further studies are needed to confirm these findings and explore the underlying mechanisms.Response and DNA repair processes have a greater influence on human longevity than other processes. It is important to understand how each sub-process contributes to genetic stability, as they have different biological roles that affect longevity in various ways. Table 3 shows the ranking of genes in the BER, HRR, and RECQ sub-processes. The gene statistics for all genes in these sub-processes were inspected to determine which genes contributed to the nominal significance of BER, HRR, and RECQ. We found several low-ranking genes for BER, while HRR was mostly associated with RAD52 and to a lesser extent NBN, MRE11A, and RAD54L. Similarly, the P-value for RECQ was mainly due to WRN and BLM. A post-hoc analysis was conducted by repeating the gene-set analysis of BER, RECQ, and HRR without the respective lowest ranking gene from the dataset. Only BER remained nominally significant, while RECQ and HRR lost significance, confirming that each sub-process's importance was induced by only one gene.

The single-SNP data from the German replication population can be found in the GWAS Central database (www.gwascentral.org). Repeating the self-contained set-based analysis of all SNPs as well as the competitive gene-set analysis of BER, HRR, and RECQ in males and females yielded consistent significance of BER. However, HRR and RECQ did not show significance, possibly due to reduced power from an inadequate sample size. Gender-specific differences were not overly relevant in this study.

Our findings suggest that repairing certain types of DNA damage induced by ROS or ionizing radiation is particularly important for human longevity. Damage induced by ROS is repaired by BER, while damage induced by ionizing radiation is repaired by HRR. Moreover, ROS-induced damage can give rise to DNA DSBs during DNA replication, inducing replication stress and fork collapse where HRR is crucial. The RECQ helicases' roles in ensuring proper DNA structure during repair could also be central, especially considering the existence of premature aging syndromes like Werner syndrome, caused by RECQ gene mutations.

The lack of replication in the German study population may be due to differences in genotyping procedures, coverage of variation in gene regions, and potentially not tagging all discovery SNPs. Additionally, the Germans were older than the Danes, and if associations are not constant throughout old age, they may not replicate well. Population-specific effects may also be a factor.

The gene-set analysis indicated that the nominal significance of BER, HRR, and RECQ was primarily driven by one gene rather than a combined effect of several genes. For RECQ and HRR, the associations were mainly driven by WRN and RAD52, respectively. This may indicate that variation in one sub-unit of the Rad51/Rad52/Rad54 protein complex could modify the entire HRR's function. Additional studies in other populations are needed to draw final conclusions.Also, indicate that RAD52 and WRN have roles beyond HRR and RECQ. WRN is a clear example of this, as it takes part in three of the nine sub-processes. Similarly, one study indicates that Rad52 may affect BER via an interaction with OGG1. Finally, our definition of the sub-processes is based on existing knowledge of DNA damage response and repair mechanisms. Therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility that additional cross-talks between the sub-processes are yet to be discovered. Contrary to this, the association of BER appears scattered over the entire gene-set, suggesting that variation in different parts of the sub-process may have consequences for longevity. Considering the central role of oxidative damage to several proposed biological theories of aging, the fact that we observe this for BER, the DNA repair process primarily responsible for repair of oxidative DNA lesions is indeed interesting. The details and widths of the sub-processes are identified through a complicated task since there is no gold standard and available databases may lack sufficient detail. Consequently, some relevant genetic variation may not be covered in the present study.

CONCLUSION

In this study, we investigated the association between human longevity and genetic variation in nine sub-processes of DNA damage response and repair, all considered to have key roles in maintenance of genetic stability and the aging process. We observed significant support for an association of the entire pathway with longevity. In the competitive analysis, we found BER, HRR, and RECQ to be nominally significantly more associated with longevity than other sub-processes. However, this did not remain significant in general. An intriguing aspect of human longevity is the difference in survival which has been suggested to have a genetic basis. A sex-stratified self-contained based analysis of all SNPs investigated showed significance for BER. The association was caused by several genes indicating that variation in BER might influence longevity more than other sub-processes.

Still, as these findings did not show replication in the German study population, more analyses are needed in additional study populations before a final conclusion can be drawn.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This study was supported by the Max-Planck Institute for Demographic Research (Rostock, Germany), the INTERREG 4 A programme Syddanmark Schleswig-K.E.R.N, the European Regional Development Fund, the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/20072011) under grant agreement no. 259679, the National Institute on Aging (P01 AG08761), the RESOLVE project (FP7-HEALTH-F4-2008-202047), and the Novo Nordisk, the Aase and Ejnar Danielsen, the Brdrene Hartmann, the King Christian the 10th and the Einer Willumsens Mindelegat Foundations. The Danish Aging Research Center is supported by a grant from the VELUX Foundation, while Mette Soerensen is supported by an individual postdoctoral grant from The Danish Council for Independent Research Medical Sciences.

A population-based study of Danish twin pairs born in 1870-1900 showed that genetic factors have a significant influence on human lifespan and longevity. The quest for genetic determinants of human longevity is challenging but insights have been gained from investigating DNA damage response and repair mechanisms. DNA repair deficiency has been associated with neurodegeneration and aging. Telomere length predicts survival independent of genetic influences. Free radicals and oxidative damage are also implicated in aging.http://www.nature.com/ejhg