Genetic Associations with Human Longevity at the APOE and ACE Loci

Francois Schachter, Laurence Faure-Delanef, Frederique Gunot, Herve Rouger, Philippe Froguel, Laurence Lesueur-Ginot & Daniel Cohen

In an effort to dissect the genetic components of longevity, we have undertaken case-control studies of populations of centenarians (n=338) and adults aged 20-70 years at several polymorphic candidate gene loci. Here we report results on two genes, chosen for their impact on cardiovascular risk, encoding apolipoprotein E (ApoE) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE).

We find that the e4 allele of APOE, which promotes premature atherosclerosis, is significantly less frequent in centenarians than in controls (p<0.001), while the frequency of the 2 allele, associated previously with type III and IV hyperlipidemia, is significantly increased (p<0.01). A variant of ACE which predisposes to coronary heart disease is surprisingly more frequent in centenarians, with a significant increase of the homozygous genotype (p<0.01). These associations provide examples of genetic influences on differential survival and may point to pleiotropic age-dependent effects on longevity.

APOE has three common alleles, designated 2, 3 and 4, which code respectively for the isoforms apoE2, apoE3 and apoE4. These alleles have a major impact on total and LDL-cholesterol levels in the serum, which in turn are highly correlated with risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. The 4 allele has been associated with ischemic heart disease in several studies. An insertion (I)/deletion (D) polymorphism in the ACE gene is associated with a major gene effect on the inter-individual variability of plasma ACE concentration, and the deletion polymorphism has been identified as a risk factor for myocardial infarction.

In order to search for genetic influences on human longevity, a population of 300 French centenarians (individuals in their 100th year and beyond) was collected, to be compared with a control group of 160 French adults aged 20-70. These populations were typed by DNA amplification for alleles of APOE and ACE.

The 4 allele frequency was significantly decreased (5.2% versus 11.2%, p<0.001), while the 2 allele frequency was significantly increased (12.8% versus 6.8%, p<0.01) in the centenarian group. The p values were less than 10 for e4 and less than 10~ for 2 when data for a second control group already genotyped were pooled with the new control population. The odds ratios, a measure of the relative chance of becoming a centenarian between subjects with or without a given allele, were 2 and 0.43 for the 2 and the 4 alleles, respectively.

The ACE allele distribution was shifted in centenarians, with an increase of the DD genotype (39.6% versus 25.6%, Table 2). The p values were less than 10- when all genotyped control populations were pooled. The D allele was more frequent in centenarians than in controls (p<0.01 when all genotyped control populations are pooled).

A subset of the centenarians included in this study had been independently selected through a different protocol, on the basis of their belonging to long-lived sibships. In this subgroup, the APOE and ACE genotypes displayed the same associations with an even more marked trend (Table 3).

We typed random subsamples of our populations at two other loci. A bi-allelic marker at D4595 on 4p16.3 chromosome (the Huntington's disease region), probe 674 with Acdl, gave a frequency of 0.33 for the rare allele in controls (n=158) and centenarians (n=164). A dinucleotide repeat within the B-cell leukemia/lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) gene on chromosome 18q21.3 (GenBank accession number: M15701) with one frequentAllele and eight rare alleles gave a frequency of 0.825 and 0.838 for the frequent allele in controls (n=103) and centenarians (n=108), respectively. Thus, for both of these polymorphisms, there was no difference between controls and centenarians. 

Gender effects and interaction between loci

Our population of centenarians was mainly composed of females, with a male to female ratio of 1:8 (see Table 1), reflecting the sex differential in longevity in France.

Table 3 APOE and ACE alleles in centenarians with long-lived siblings 

Discussion

The potential overlap between cases and controls (the frequency of controls that might become centenarians) is small enough - less than 2.4% and 0.5% of women and men respectively at age 70, based on 1980 estimates taken from a Caucasian population - as to remain negligible. The frequencies found in our control group for APOE and ACE alleles agree well with those reported in French populations from Paris, Lille, and Strasbourg (for the differences reported in Tables 1 and 2 are all enhanced when controls are compared with the selected subgroup of centenarians). However, statistical significance is diminished due to the small sample size. P1 refers to the population of all the centenarians. P2 refers to the population of controls.

Table 5 Interaction between APOE and ACE in centenarians 

ACE has functions besides its role on the renin-angiotensin and kallikrein-kinin systems. Its ability to cleave neuropeptides such as enkephalin, substance P, and LHRH, and its regional distribution in the brain point to neuroendocrine functions. Furthermore, an increase with age in brain cortical ACE activity suggests that an adaptive response to increasing needs may occur during ageing. ACE may also function as an immunomodulator by helping to process endogenous peptides within the MHC class I complex in cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and its level is also associated with the I/D polymorphism in these cells. These data indicate potential roles of ACE outside the cardiovascular system that may well influence survival. Insofar as the quantity of ACE enzyme is a significant parameter in these other functions, they provide a rationale for understanding the differential influence on survival of the ACE-I/D polymorphism. However, the association with longevity may also stem from linkage disequilibrium with another influential polymorphism in a nearby gene. 

In this regard, it is notable that the gene for human growth hormone, which may have an important role in senescence, shows strong linkage to ACE, on chromosome 17q23 (ref. 26).

The frequencies of APOE alleles are shown in parenthesis for each genotype at the ACE locus. The visible trend of negative correlation between the e2 and D alleles does not reach significance (p=0.09 for a comparison of the 2 allele frequency between DD and II genotypes), Framingham (USA)* and Minster (West Germany). Although a decrease in the 4 allele frequency was found in Canadian octogenarians, it was not as marked as in our centenarians, and there was no significant change in the 2 allele frequency; on the other hand, the increase of the 3 allele frequency in females was less pronounced in our group of centenarians. Another study*> reported a decreased frequency of 4 in older female diabetic patients.

The well-documented impact of ApoE-e4 on cardiovascular risk is commonly attributed to its hypercholesterolaemic effect; the 2 allele has opposite effects on total and LDL-cholesterol, which has led to the suggestion that it might protect against atherosclerosis. However, it also has a hypertriglyceridaemic effect and may be a risk factor for ischaemic heart disease in certain environments. Thus, while the lower frequency of ApoE-e4 in centenarians is consistent with its risk factor status for heart disease, the increase in 2 allele frequency is a more unexpected result. If 2 and 3 were neutral, with respect to survival, the decrease in 4 frequency would result in an evenly distributed increase in the two other allele frequencies, whereas in fact, the entire increase is borne by 2, adding to the evidence for a protective effect of this allele.

The same questions arise for ApoE, which lies in the apolipoprotein cluster in chromosome 19q13.2 (ref. 32). There is compelling evidence for a direct effect of the e4 allele: ApoE plays a role in nerve development and repair; it is expressed in large quantities in the brain, where it binds to B-amyloid with an affinity that is highest for the e4 isozyme; and the 4 allele has an increased frequency in late-onsetIn order to examine possible associations in populations of different ethnic backgrounds residing in different environments, it is important to verify the following methods. Firstly, the ACE diallelic polymorphism was genotyped by amplifying the variable segment and resolving the 190 and 490 bp alleles on a 1.5% agarose gel. Secondly, APOB polymorphisms were analyzed by amplification of the two DNA segments, direct visualization of the amplified product on a 10% non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel for ins/del, and visualization of the Xbal digestion products on a 1.5% agarose gel for the Thr substitution. Thirdly, Southern hybridization with probe 674 and Accl digested samples revealed the polymorphism at D4S95. Fourthly, BCL-2 microsatellite alleles were typed using primers 5'-TGTGTGTGTGTAGCGCGTGT-3' and 5'-CTGGCCGTGTGAGTGTGTGT-3' for amplification in a reaction mix containing 200 ng genomic DNA, 10 pmoles of each primer, and 0.75 U of Taq polymerase in a final volume of 50 pl. The alleles were revealed by Southern hybridization with a (CA) probe after resolution of the fragments on a 10% denaturing polyacrylamide gel. 

Methodology: Centenarians were recruited from all over France (regional distribution: 40% Paris region, 18% central, 4% northern, 5% eastern, 15% western, 18% southern), at their home or in institutions, through media advertising and retirement organizations. They were all Caucasians residing in France. The criterion for inclusion in the study was being at least 99 years old on the day of blood collection. The population of 338 centenarians was composed of 11% men and 89% women with a mean age of 100.71 + 0.13. Controls were chosen among unrelated normal individuals from French CEPH pedigrees.

Acknowledgements: We thank Fondation IPSEN, ARRCO, AGIRC, and the participating clinicians as well as E. Snard and J. Boirot for help in collecting the centenarians, F. Lethrosne, F. Dufour, C. Habita, M. Legrand, L. Gressin, C. Massart, C. Billon for technical assistance, M.R. Hayden for probe 674; F. Cambien, T. Kirkwood, and R. Moulias for support and discussion.

Genotypes: APOE genotypes were analyzed by Hhal digestion of a 244 bp PCR-amplified fragment containing the two polymorphic sites, with the restriction fragments resolved on a 10% non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel. 

References: 

1) Andrew et al., Nonrandom association between Huntington disease and two loci separated by about Mb on chromosome 4p16.3. Genomics 12, 301-308 (1992).
2) Weber JL & May PE. Abundant class of human DNA polymorphisms which can be typed using the polymerase chain reaction. Am J Hum Genet 44, 388-396 (1989).
3) Fries JF. Aging, natural death and the compression of morbidity. N Engl J Med 303, 130-135 (1980).
4) Ordovas JM et al., Apolipoprotein E isoform phenotyping methodology and population frequency with identification of ap and ap isoforms. J lipid Res 31, 1203-1216 (1990).
5) Utermann G et al., Genetic control of human apolipoprotein E polymorphism: comparison one- and two-dimensional techniques of isoprotein analysis. Hum Genet 60, 244-249 (1982).
6) Boemi M et al., Gender differences in a type (non-insulin-dependent) diabetic population with respect to apolipoprotein E phenotype frequencies. Diabetologia 34, 845-849 (1991).
7) Jeunemaitre X et al., Absence of linkage between the angiotensin converting enzyme locus and human essential hypertension. Nature Genet 1, 72-75 (1992).
8) Ehlers MRW & Riordan JF. Angiotensin-converting enzyme: new concepts concerning its biological role. Biochemistry 28, 5311-5318 (1989).
9) Costerousse O et al., The angiotensin-converting enzyme (kininase II): molecular organization and regulation of its expression in humans. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 20 Suppl 9, S34-S39 (1992).
10The processed text is already correct and does not require any further proofreading or improvement.