Gender-specific association between 1082 IL-10 promoter polymorphism and longevity

D Lio1, L Scola1, A Crivello1, G Colonna-Romano1, G Candore1, M Bonafè2, L Cavallone3, C Franceschi2,3 and C Caruso1

1 Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Metodologie Biomediche, Università di Palermo, Palermo, Italy; 
2 Dipartimento di Patologia Sperimentale, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy; 
3 Istituto Nazionale di Riposo e Cura per Anziani di Ancona, Ancona, Italy 

Ageing is characterized by a pro-inflammatory status that could contribute to the onset of major age-related diseases. Thus, genetic variations in pro- or anti-inflammatory cytokines might influence successful ageing and longevity. IL-10 is an appropriate candidate because it exerts powerful inhibitory effects on pro-inflammatory function. IL-10 production is controlled by several polymorphic elements in the 5' flanking region of the IL-10 gene on 1q32 locus, involving alleles at two microsatellite regions and several polymorphisms in the promoter region. We analyzed 190 Italian centenarians (≥99 years old), 159 women and 31 men and 260 (≤60 years old) control subjects (99 women and 161 men), matched for geographical distribution. Genotype frequencies for 1082GA, 819CT and 592CA IL-10 proximal promoter biallelic polymorphisms were determined by sequence-specific probes. The 1082G homozygous genotype was increased in centenarians (P ≤ 0.025) but not in centenarian women. No difference was found between centenarians and control subjects for the other two polymorphisms. The presence of the 1082GG genotype, suggested to be associated with high IL-10 production, significantly increases the possibility to reach the extreme limit of human lifespan in men. Together with previous data on other polymorphic loci (Tyrosine Hydroxylase, mitochondrial DNA, IL-6, haemochromatosis, IFN-γ), this finding points out that gender is a major variable in the genetics of longevity, suggesting that men and women use different strategies to reach longevity. Concerning the biological significance of this association, we have not found functional proof that IL-10 is involved. Thus, we should conclude that our data only suggest that a marker on 1q32 genomic region may be involved in successful ageing in men. However, recent data on IL-6 and IFN-γ genes suggest longevity is negatively associated with genotypes coding for a pro-inflammatory profile. Thus, it is intriguing that the possession of 1082G genotype, suggested to be associated with high IL-10 production, is significantly increased in centenarians.

Keywords: IL-10; longevity; inflammation; centenarians; immunogenetics

Introduction

Survival from 80 to more than 100 years of age suggests that genetics plays a role in longevity. Indeed, there is some evidence that extreme longevity clusters in some families and preliminary results from several studies suggest a modest recurrent risk for exceptional longevity. Therefore, the role of genetics in longevity might be much higher than predicted. Current evidence, based primarily on Scandinavian Twin Registries, suggests that about a quarter of the variation in adult lifespan can be attributed to genetic factors; i.e., the heritability of lifespan is about 25%. It is not known, however, how important genetic factors are in explaining survival from 80 to more than 100 years of age.

A dysregulation of both immune and inflammatory responses occurring with increasing age is believed to substantially contribute to morbidity and mortality in humans. Conversely, human longevity seems to be directly correlated with optimal functioning of the immune system, suggesting that some genetic determinants of successful ageing might reside in those polymorphisms for the immune system genes that regulate immune responses.

Correspondence: Prof. C Caruso, Laboratorio di Immunopatologia, Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Metodologie Biomediche, Corso Tukory 211, 90134 Palermo, Italy. E-mail: marcoc@unipa.it

These studies have been supported by grants from MURST, Rome (ex 40%, Immunogenetics of Longevity, coordinated by Professor Calogero Caruso, to CC and DL), ex 60% to CC and DL., from Ministry of Health Projects Immunological parameters age-related and Pharmacogenomics of Alzheimer's Disease, from Sicilian Government Breast Cancer and Immune Response and by a cooperation contract between the Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Metodologie Biomediche dell'Università di Palermo and theTargets for transcription regulating factors have been described, even if conflicting results have been reported on which of these may influence, alone or in reciprocal linkage, the transcription of IL-10. However, a biallelic polymorphism at 1082 (G>A) has been described in the proximal region of the promoter, and the homozygous genotype for the SNP allele 1082*G seems to be associated with higher IL-10 production compared to G/A heterozygous and A/A homozygous. The effects of this allelic promoter region difference (relative to the transcription start site) on IL-10 gene activation have been confirmed in reporter gene assays. On the other hand, it should be taken into account that different effects may be observed in different cells with different stimuli. However, this SNP seems to be functionally relevant. In fact, 1082A carriers (i.e., IL-10 low producers) have been shown to be more likely to develop inflammatory diseases (or to be affected by more severe clinical patterns), such as rheumatoid arthritis. Conversely, it can be hypothesized that anti-inflammatory cytokines might be involved in successful aging and longevity. The cytokine IL-10 seems to be an appropriate candidate from this point of view. In fact, IL-10 was recognized for its ability to inhibit activation and effector function of T cells, monocytes and macrophages. Its principal routine function appears to be to limit and ultimately terminate inflammatory responses.

The expression of IL-10 is tightly regulated. Its levels are variable between individuals, and almost 70% of such intra-individual variation is heritable. In fact, IL-10 production is controlled by several polymorphic elements in the 5' flanking region of IL-10 gene on 1q32 locus, involving alleles at two microsatellite regions and several SNPs both in distal and proximal promoter region. However, in the proximal promoter region, three different inheritable haplotypes involving three biallelic polymorphisms at 1082 (G>A), 819 (C>T), and 592 (C>A) nucleotides of IL-10 promoter have been identified. One containing the 1082G allele (1082G/819C/592C) seems to be associated with high IL-10 production, and two containing the 1082A allele (1082A/819C/592C and 1082A/819T/592A) seem to be associated with lower cytokine production.

The prevalence of these polymorphisms was analyzed in a large number of Italian centenarians and compared to a group of younger control subjects. The three SNPs under study are in strong linkage. Thus, as observed in other Caucasian populations, only three out of eight possible haplotypes (GCC, ACC, and ATA) segregate in our population. The 1082G/819C/592C haplotype was the more represented haplotype in both the controls and centenarians (0.62±0.02 vs. 0.68±0.03), whereas the 1082A/819T/592A was the less frequent haplotype (0.16±0.01 vs. 0.13±0.02). The frequencies of the 1082A/819C/592C haplotype respectively were 0.21±0.01 and 0.19±0.02. No significant differences in haplotype distribution between centenarians and controls were observed by performing the analysis both on the whole and according to gender.

The positive significant association between 1082 IL-10 polymorphism and longevity was observed in centenarian men but not in women, in accord with previous observations on polymorphisms in Tyrosine Hydroxylase gene and mtDNA haplogroups. On the other hand, hemochromatosis and interferon (IFN)-γ gene polymorphisms have been shown to be associated with longevity in women but not in men. Altogether, these findings point out that gender is a major variable in the genetics of longevity and suggest as a working hypothesis that men and women follow different strategies to reach longevity.

The clean effect of a given gene is a function of the gene pair combination received from parents, and for 1082 SNP, a gene dosage-dependent effect on the IL-10 production has been suggested. Thus, we have evaluated the homo- and heterozygous frequency for the three SNPs under study in the two groups of subjects. The number of centenarians homozygous for 1082G genotype was increased in comparison with younger control subjects, but this increase attained significance only in men. Turner et al. showed not only that the 1082G allele is correlated with a high capability to produce IL-10 but also that this characteristicEffros RB, Caruso C, Remarque E, Barnett Y, Solana R. T cells and aging. Front Biosci; : D. 

Franceschi C, Bonafè M, Valensin S et al. Inflammaging: An evolutionary perspective on immunosenescence. Ann NY Acad Sci; : .

Bruunsgaard H, Pedersen M, Pedersen BK. Aging and pro-inflammatory cytokines. Curr Opin Hematol; : .

Franceschi C, Monti D, Sansoni P, Cossarizza A. The immunology of exceptional individuals: the lesson of centenarians. Immunol Today; : .

Caruso C, Candore G, Colonna Romano G et al. HLA, aging and longevity: a critical reappraisal. Human Immunol; : .

Bidwell J, Keen L, Gallagher G et al. Cytokine gene polymorphism in human disease: online databases. Genes Immun; : .

Bidwell J, Keen L, Gallagher G et al. Cytokine gene polymorphism in human disease: online databases, supplement. Genes Immun; : .

Subjects and IL-10 typing (9 DNA samples were obtained from 190 centenarians (99 years old, 159 women and 31 men) from north (n=58), centre (n=80) and south (n=52) Italy). Women outnumbered men with a ratio of about 5:1, similar to that expected from previous investigations. Age was verified by researching archival records in the City Hall and/or Church registries, paying attention to the concordance between reported age and personal chronologies (age of marriage and of military service for men, age of first and last pregnancy for women, age of children among others). DNAs from 260 (99 women and 161 men) 60 years old controls matched for geographical origin were also collected. Written informed consent for enrolling in the study and for personal data management was obtained from all the subjects according to Italian laws. Blood specimens were collected in tripotassium EDTA sterile tubes and immediately stored at -70 C. Genomic DNA extraction was carried out according to Miller et al and stored at -20 C for the IL-10 gene analysis. Three different biallelic polymorphisms at 1082 (G>A), 819 (C>T) and 592 (C>A) nucleotides, were identified using the oligotyping hybridisation methodology of Turner et al as previously described. Statistical analysis IL-10 allele frequencies were evaluated by gene count and haplotype frequencies calculated by a maximum likelihood algorithm (Arlequin Software, University of Geneva). The data were tested for the goodness-of-fit and between the observed and expected genotype values (chi-square test) and their fit to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Analysis of statistical differences between haplotype frequencies in centenarians and controls were evaluated by...

13 http://www.pam.bris.ac.uk./services/GAI/cytokine4.htm.

14 Bhojak TJ, DeKosky ST, Ganguli M, Kamboh MI. Genetic polymorphisms in the cathespin D and interleukin-1 genes and the risk of Alzheimer's disease. Neurosci Lett; : .

Grimaldi LM, Casadei VM, Ferri C et al. Association of early-onset Alzheimer's disease with an interleukin-1α gene polymorphism. Ann Neurol; : .

Hobson EE, Ralston SH. Role of genetic factors in the pathophysiology and management of osteoporosis. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf); : .

Franceschi C, Valensin S, Lescai F et al. Neuroinflammation and the genetics of Alzheimer's disease: the search for a pro-inflammatory phenotype. Aging (Milan); : .

Musker SM, Curran MD, Dynan KB et al. Association between polymorphism in regulatory region of gene encoding tumour necrosis factor alpha and risk of Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia: a case-control study. Lancet; : .

Ferrucci L, Harris TB, Guralnik JM et al. Serum IL-6 level and the development of disability in older persons. J Am Geriatr Soc; : .

Bonafè M, Olivieri F, Cavallone L et al. A gender-dependent genetic predisposition to produce high levels of IL-6 is detrimental for longevity. Eur J Immunol; : .

Moore KW, de Waal Malefyt R, Coffman RL, O'Garra A. Interleukin-10 and the interleukin-10 receptor. Annu Rev Immunol; : .

Kube D, Rieth H, Eskdale J, Kremsner PG, Gallagher G. StructuralI'm sorry, there is no text enclosed in ``` ``` for me to proofread and improve. Please provide the text so I can assist you.