Analysis of the Association Between Apolipoprotein E Polymorphism and Cardiovascular Risk Factors in an Elderly Population with Longevity

Helena Augustin Schwanke, Ivana Beatrice Mnica da Cruz, Ney Furhmann Leal, Rosane Scheibe, Yukio Moriguchi, Emlio Hideyuki Moriguchi

Objective

To establish the allelic and genotypic frequencies related to apolipoprotein E (ApoE) polymorphism and association of the genotypes with risk factors and cardiovascular morbidity in an elderly population with longevity.

An increasing number of genetic polymorphisms have been associated with the susceptibility to cardiovascular diseases, such as the apolipoprotein E (ApoE) gene. Studies have shown that the E4 allelic variant is associated with the mechanisms of development of atherosclerosis, dementia, and more recently, with the risk of bone fractures [1-5].

Methods

We analyzed 70 elderly patients aged 80 years or more who were part of the Projeto Veranpolis. We used the gene amplification technique through the polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) and cleavage with the restriction enzyme Hha I to identify the ApoE genotypes. The most frequent genotypes were compared considering biological variables and cardiovascular risks and morbidity.

The first genetic studies in cardiology were those of the association between ApoE polymorphism and coronary artery disease [6]. Apolipoprotein E participates in the metabolism of lipoproteins and plays a significant role in the transport of the cholesterol molecule [1 - ligand of the LDL receptor; 2 - activator of enzymes like hepatic lipase; 3 - hepatic production of very low density lipoprotein (VLDL)] [7,8]. In addition, this protein is related to immunoregulation and neurobiological routes (neuronal repair, remodeling, and protection). Apolipoprotein E is mainly synthesized in the liver (> 90%), but also in other tissues, such as the bowel, brain, lungs, kidneys, and macrophages, and secreted as a glycosylated protein. Apolipoprotein E polymorphism is located in the long arm of chromosome 19. Point changes are the molecular features of this polymorphism in the nitrogen bases, causing the replacement of 1 amino acid in the 112 and 158 positions of the peptide chain. The 3 most common isoforms are as follows: E2 (cysteine/cysteine), E3 (cysteine/arginine), and E4 (arginine/arginine). Of the 3 isoforms, E3 is the most frequently reported in the literature in the general population and E4 is rare in the centenarian population. The allelic frequency of ApoE varies in populations because the polymorphism of its locus ranges from 16% to 53% according to the population. Therefore, different phenotypes of ApoE exist, and they result from 6 genotypes as follows: 3 homozygous (E2E2, E3E3, and E4E4), and 3 heterozygous (E2E3, E3E4, and E2E4). Apolipoprotein E polymorphism changes protein both in its structure and function. The E2 isoform generates a protein whose binding to the LDL receptor is defective (in the rare situation of homozygosis and in the presence of other factors, such as diabetes mellitus, it may generate type III Fredrickson dyslipidemia or dysbetalipoproteinemia). On the other hand, the E4 isoform generates a protein whose affinity for the LDL receptor is 4 times greater than that for LDL itself [1-5,9]. Population studies have shown that the serum levels of LDL-cholesterol (LDL-c) and apolipoprotein B (ApoB) are higher in individuals with the E4 allele, intermediate in individuals with the E3 allele, and lower in individuals with the E2 allele [10,11].

A few studies have also associated the presence of the E2 allele with greater longevity because a higher frequency of that allele is observed in nonagenarians and centenarians [12,13]. These results, however, have not been reproduced in all the populations studied, and they seem not to follow a universal pattern. Excluding the possible methodological problems associated with this type of study reviewed by Marian [5] and Mansur [6], one of the hypotheses to be considered is that in chronic and degenerative diseases with a multifactorial origin, the set of genetic variations of a population associated with the social and environmental surroundings of the same population and with the processes related to biogerontology (biology of aging) canprocessed text:

A molecular weight marker of 10-bp ladder was used to analyze and identify the characteristic bands of each allele. Lipid values (mg/dL) for adults (>20 years) are as follows: Desirable (<200 TC), Borderline (200-239 TC), and Alterated (240 TC); Desirable (<130 LDL-c), Borderline (130-159 LDL-c), and Alterated (160 LDL-c); HDL-c (>35); and Desirable (<200 TG) and Alterated (200 TG). For biochemical assessment, venous blood samples were collected from study participants after a 12-hour fast, using the venoclysis system with the disposable vacuum device (Vacutainer). Tubes with no anticoagulant were used to quantify the lipid profile, Lp(a), glucose, and uric acid. Tubes with sodium citrate were used for fibrinogen quantification. The blood samples were centrifuged for 15 minutes in a Kubota KC-70 centrifuge at a velocity of 3,000 rpm to separate plasma from the remaining cells. Plasma was divided into five 1.0-mL aliquots in Eppendorf tubes with micropipettes. The plasma aliquots were refrigerated between -8 and 4°C for a maximum of 24 hours.

A commercial kit (Paran, Brazil) was used for lipid quantification, and the mean of two measurements performed for each plasma sample was considered the final value. Glycemic levels above 126 mg/dL were considered increased. Plasma fibrinogen was quantified according to the turbidimetric method using the Tecnow 7000 spectrophotometer (Tecnow Instrumentos Científicos, São Paulo). Fibrinogen levels above 300 mg/dL were considered increased. Measurement of plasma uric acid was performed using the enzymatic method (UV, Method GIDH) with the Merck commercial kit (Germany). Levels above 7.0 mg/dL were considered increased. 

To analyze total cholesterol, the manual technique of the enzymatic colorimetric reaction was used with the commercial enzymatic reagent Cholesterin/Cholesterol Chod-Pap (MPR2, Boehringer-Mannheim, Germany). Readings of standard cholesterol levels were performed with the Preciset Cholesterol Calibrator 125512 (Boehringer-Mannheim, Germany), and the final value was the mean of two measurements performed for each plasma sample. To analyze HDL-cholesterol (HDL-c), the heparin-Mn2+ precipitation method by Gildez was used with some adaptations. The lipoproteins containing apolipoproteins B-100 (VLDL and LDL) were precipitated according to the heparin-Mn2+ precipitation method (Sigma Chemical Co, USA) and then incubated and centrifuged (refrigerated centrifuge, RB-1811 Model, Tomy Seiko Co. Ltd, Japan). The floating material was then collected for quantification of HDL-c particles through the colorimetric enzymatic reaction for cholesterol; the mean of two measurements for each plasma sample was considered the final value. The LDL-c value was obtained with the Friedewald formula for triglyceride levels below 400 mg/dL. Samples with triglyceride levels above 400 mg/dL were excluded. Lipoprotein(a) levels were obtained with the Boehringer nephelometric system (Boehringer Nephelometer 100); Lipoprotein(a) levels above 30 mg/dL were considered increased. For glucose level determination, the colorimetric enzymatic method was performed using the Bio Diagnóstica ICQ Ltda commercial kit.

Complementary clinical examinations were performed, and structured interviews were applied to detect cardiovascular risk and morbidity. Three clinical parameters were used for obesity: body mass index, waist/hip ratio, and percent body fat (% fat). Individuals who were classified as obese in the three parameters or those classified as obese in at least two parameters and overweight according to the body mass index were considered obese. Body mass index was calculated by dividing the weight in kilograms by the square of the height in meters squared (kg/m²). The waist/hip ratio was calculated by dividing the minimum abdominal circumference by the maximum abdominal circumference. Percent fat was obtained with fat quantification by electrical bioimpedanciometry. 

The manual technique of colorimetric enzymatic reaction was used for triglyceride quantification with the commercial enzymatic kit Labtest TG Gpo-Ana (Argentina). Readings of standard triglyceride levels were performed with the Preciset Triglyceride Calibrator 125512 (Boehringer-Mannheim, Germany), and the final value was the mean of two measurements performed for each plasma sample. Levels above 200 mg/dL were considered increased.genotype individuals had a significantly higher mean LDL-c concentration than E3E3 individuals, while the mean uric acid concentration was significantly higher in E3E3 individuals than in E3E4 individuals. Fibrinogen levels were statistically higher in E3E4 individuals, but all means observed in the remaining genotypes were not considered indicative of cardiovascular risk. The frequency of the E4 allele in the population studied was above 10%, even though the frequencies were within the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Individuals with the E3E4 genotype were twice more likely to have LDL-c and fibrinogen levels above that expected than individuals with the E3E3 genotype were. On the other hand, E3E4 individuals were less likely to have more elevated uric acid levels than E3E3 individuals were. The ApoE frequencies in Veranpolis were compared with those of different populations or different age groups of these populations, or both. Further genetic studies may help to elucidate this phenomenon.Elderly individuals tend to have higher rates of familial morbidity and mortality due to cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia. However, these differences were not statistically significant (Fig. 1). Despite the high frequency of the E4 allele in the elderly, no E4E4 genotype was observed. Several studies carried out in other countries suggest a frequency-dependent effect of the E4 allele, i.e., the presence of two copies of the E4 allele is associated with early mortality. As no elderly individual with this genotype was observed, the data obtained confirm this hypothesis.

Discussion:

The analysis of the results suggests a more complex interaction between ApoE polymorphism and the variables related to the cardiovascular events studied. Genotype-dependent relations, which have not yet been explored, may exist.

FHCVD CVD DM Ob Dislip. Hyp. Comorbidity and morbidity CVD %90807060504030204446 5922 Deses85 mese47950 onTilelin. Hew.

Regarding gene and genotypic frequencies related to ApoE polymorphism, it is important to emphasize that these frequencies vary according to the population studied. Review studies have shown that gene frequencies related to this polymorphism are extremely variable, mainly concerning the E4 allele frequency 1,2. In Europe, this gene has a gradient distribution, with the E4 allele being more frequent in the northern region and less frequent in the southern region. In Asian populations, this allele has a low frequency unlike that of African and New Guinea populations 31-33. However, specific studies on possible causes of this variation are still in their infancy (Fig. 1).

In general, gene frequencies observed in this study were similar to those reported by other authors. Concerning an association between blood pressure and ApoE genotypes, some studies have shown an association between systolic blood pressure and E4E4 and E3E4 genotypes, suggesting that ApoE polymorphism can be a silent factor influencing the increase in blood pressure 31. Other studies, however, did not show this association 32,34. In our study, an inverse association was observed: high diastolic blood pressure in the E3E3 elderly. However, no reference was found about this possible association in the literature. This suggests that a correlation between blood pressure levels and ApoE polymorphism may exist, even though no causal genotype-phenotype relation was observed in regard to blood pressure, indicating that other not yet identified genetic-environmental interactions may exist.

Individuals and variables of the lipid profile assessed by simple logistic regression and their respective odds ratio Variables X2 P Odds ratio 95% CI LDL-cholesterol (130 mg/dL) 5.82 0.013 2.61 1.04-6.56 Uric acid (6 mg/dL) 6.05 0.007 0.09 0.10-0.78 Fibrinogen (300 mg/dL) 12.21 0.042 2.07 1.20-7.88 Total cholesterol (240 mg/dL) 3.58 0.060 1.23 2.77-5.43 X2- chi-square; CI - confidence interval

Surprisingly, individuals with the E3E4 genotype had a significantly higher mean age than E3E3 individuals did in our results. Differences in ApoE frequencies and longevity strongly suggest that relations between certain genotypes and longevity are also influenced by other variables, such as environmental factors and the interaction with other genetic factors (Fig.1). This variation could be responsible for the difficulty in defining a biological and clinical profile strongly correlated with risk factors for cardiovascular diseases at advanced ages (>80 years). Therefore, we believe that this may have contributed to the result obtained.

Studies showed higher mortality in the group of individuals with low blood pressure (both systolic and diastolic) than that in the group of individuals with higher-than-expected blood pressure 35. This result was later confirmed in similar studies, including the Framingham Study, in which participants were divided into two groups (<75 and 75 years). A substantial increase in the mortality rate was observed both in males and females with systolic blood pressure <120 mmHg. As we do not yet know precisely which role hypertension plays in the elderly, and the results here obtained showed an association between high diastolic blood pressure and E3E3 genotype, we cannot consider that the relation represents an additional risk in individuals with the referred genotype. Future studies on mortality follow-up in the elderly with different genotypes may clarify whether this relation is beneficial, neutral, or bad.

In several biological variables studied, body mass index and diastolic blood pressure showed significant differences among the most frequent ApoE genotypes. In this case, individuals with E3E3According to ethnic group, an association between the E3E4 genotype and acute myocardial infarction at an early age of 31 was observed. An association between the E4 allele and myocardial ischemia was also noted at 34. Among studies where no consistent association between ApoE genotypes and cardiovascular diseases was found, longitudinal studies on the relation between genotypes and coronary lesions lasting 4 to 6 years can be cited at 37. In one study conducted in Italy with 15,000 individuals, no association between cardiovascular diseases and differential ApoE genotypes was found at 33. It is still early to confirm or deny the association between the ApoE gene and cardiovascular diseases because the relation between ApoE and cardiovascular diseases is still controversial. We can infer that if this relation exists, it is not causal (direct) and may be associated with other factors, both genetic and environmental 1-4.

Unlike LDL-c, no correlation was observed between ApoE genotypes and HDL-c, mainly in regard to the presence of the E4 allele. This finding was also reported in other population studies, such as that by Pablos-Mendez et al at 36. Population studies have suggested the association between an increase in the frequency of hypertriglyceridemia (type IV HLP) in individuals with the E2 allele and individuals with the E4E4 genotype; a lower frequency of the E2 allele associated with dyslipidemia IIa; and an increase in the frequency of type IIb dyslipidemia in individuals with at least one E4 allele in their genotype at 32. However, the association of the effect of hypocholesterolemia and the E2 allele was stronger than the association of hypercholesterolemia and the E4 allele at 32.

Other findings of our study that were not reported in studies published about the subject were the relation between high fibrinogen levels and the E3E4 genotype and the relation between more elevated levels of uric acid and the E3E3 genotype. In regard to the former, it is worth noting that elevated fibrinogen levels are associated with cardiovascular diseases at 22. However, despite the differences observed between the two genotypes, the fibrinogen levels observed are within the reference levels (< 400 mg/dL) for both groups. Only one individual in the entire sample had fibrinogen levels higher than 400 mg/dL. In regard to the second finding, considering that high uric acid levels may increase the risk of cardiovascular diseases at 38, this association could reduce the benefits related to the E3E3 genotype in regard to atherogenesis.

In the third phase of the analysis of the results, we investigated the association between ApoE genotypes with morbidity and other plasma factors of cardiovascular diseases. The general analysis of results showed no association between individuals with the E4 allele and morbidity and comorbidity associated with cardiovascular diseases except for the occurrence of a significantly higher number of obese individuals with the E3E3 genotype. The lack of association with cardiovascular morbidity is not surprising because data in the literature are controversial. The studies in which a relation between cardiovascular diseases and ApoE genotypes was found report an Our results suggest a hypothesis that we need to increase knowledge about elderly longevity because data in the literature show that elderly people have a biology and a set of risk factors for cardiovascular diseases different from those in E3E3 individuals, suggesting the influence of additional environmental factors that were not analyzed in this study (such as nutritional condition) or interaction with other genetic factors that could reduce or neutralize negative effects caused by the E4 allele or reduce beneficial effects of E3E3 genotype (such as high uric acid levels). Complementary studies on the relation to other genetic polymorphisms in this population may help to elucidate this hypothesis.

Regarding individuals with longevity, the prevalence of cardiovascular diseases is very high, and the proportion of these people will significantly increase in the next decades. Future studies determining a pattern of cardiovascular risk for this age group will be paramount, both for preventing and handling these risks. Therefore, studies on the polymorphism of genes associated with cardiovascular diseases should be carried out comparing populations of individuals with heart disease with populations of healthy individuals and also individuals above the age of 80 years.

Acknowledgement: Our results allow us to conclude that, even though no individual with the E4E4 genotype existed in the population studied, suggesting a frequency-dependent effect, no association with risk factors and morbidity related to cardiovascular diseases in heterozygous individuals was observed. This happened even with LDL-c levels significantly higher than those observed in individuals with the E2 allele. We thank the Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal (CAPES), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq),I'm sorry, but the provided text is too short and lacks context. Could you please provide me with more information or text to work with?