possible compensatory response to reduced IGFIR signaling, and smaller stature in female offspring of centenarians, led us to explore the IGF1R gene in more detail.

We conducted sequence analysis of the IGF1 and IGF1R genes of female centenarians and controls. We found an overrepresentation of heterozygous mutations in the IGF1R gene among centenarians compared to controls. These mutations are associated with high serum IGFI levels and reduced activity of the IGFIR, as measured in transformed lymphocytes. Therefore, genetic alterations in the human IGF1R that result in altered IGF signaling pathway confer an increase in susceptibility to human longevity, suggesting a role of this pathway in modulation of human lifespan.

In conclusion, our study provides evidence for the role of the IGF signaling pathway in human longevity. We demonstrated a gender-specific increase in serum IGFI associated with smaller stature and identified partial loss-of-function mutations in the IGF1R gene that are overrepresented among centenarians compared to controls. These findings suggest that altered signaling in the insulin/IGFI pathway may influence human lifespan. However, further studies are needed to fully understand the complex role of this regulatory network for exceptional longevity in human populations.Small reductions in auxological growth are highly reminiscent of a report on female mutant mice haploinsufficient for the IGFIR, which display nearly identical features, including gender-specific lifespan extension (15). The overrepresentation of the two nonsynonymous mutations among centenarians compared with controls was statistically significant (P 0.02). Of the nine centenarian carriers, IGFI levels and height were available for six carriers. When we compared the mutation carriers (n 6, 66% female) vs. noncarriers (n 163, 67% female) among centenarians, the mutation carriers had significantly higher IGFI levels (165 tly4 21 vs. 121 6 ng/ml, P 0.04) than noncarriers after adjustment for gender and age (Table 2). Although the mutation carriers were slightly shorter (162 2.8 vs. 165 Se | 0.8 cm, P 0.41) than noncarriers, this difference was not statistically significant.

We comprehensively screened genomic DNA from a subset of female centenarians with heights below the mean for that population (n 79) and female controls (n 161) for all possible genetic variations throughout the coding exons and splice junctions of the IGF1 and IGF1R genes by using 2D gene scanning and DNA sequencing (Fig. 2). Remarkably, we did not find a single variation in the IGF1 gene, suggesting that the coding regions of this gene are highly conserved. In contrast, the IGF1R gene was highly polymorphic with a total of 20 sequence variants, among which nine were previously unknown novel variants that were not reported in the various SNP databases (Table 1). Five SNPs of the nine novel variants were in a coding region.

To assess the functional impact of the mutations identified in centenarians, we analyzed immortalized lymphocytes from centenarians by using an IGFIR ELISA. Immortalized lymphocytes from the two nonsynonymous, 244G A (Ala-37Thr) and 1355G A (Arg-407His), and one synonymous, 1545G A (Thr-470Thr), mutation carriers of female centenarians showed a significant reduction in IGFIR levels compared with lymphocytes from 10 female centenarians without the mutations (P 0.03) (Fig. 1C). Moreover, when treated with IGFI, lymphocytes from the centenarian mutation carriers demonstrated reduced phosphorylation of AKT compared with the centenarian noncarriers (Fig. 1 D and E), suggesting that these mutations lead to decreases in IGF signaling.

Despite the well-established role of the GH/IGF axis in modulation of lifespan in laboratory animals, its role in human longevity has been controversial. The identification of new nonsynonymous mutations in the IGF1R gene that result in reduced IGF signaling among centenarians suggests a similar role for this pathway in modulation of human lifespan as observed in model organisms. The centenarian mutation carriers display manifestations of elevated serum IGFI levels and a trend toward smaller height, reminiscent of the phenotypes observed in mice haploinsufficient for the IGF1R with extended lifespan (15). Comprehensive analysis of all genes within this axis will be required to firmly establish a role of the IGFI axis in modulation of human longevity.

In contrast, we identified a diverse set of genetic alterations in the IGF1R gene in this population. Of particular interest is the enrichment of the variations in the coding region, especially the nonsynonymous mutations in centenarians compared with the control population, suggesting a contribution of multiple rare alleles leading to a major phenotypic effect on human longevity in the general population (21). So far, only a few nonsynonymous IGF1R mutations have been reported from patients with severe phenotypes such as intrauterine growth retardation (20, 22). The prevalence of such nonsynonymous mutations in the normal population has been obscure because of the relatively low number of control individuals studied in previous reports (n 100). Resequencing of the IGF1R gene in the Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain cohort indicated that the Arg-407His variation (ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/snp\_ss.cgi?subsnp\_id=46533818) was indeed very rare, heterozygosity being detected in only one individual from a total of 354 individuals. Together with our data, these results clearly demonstrate the rarity of nonsynonymous mutations among the normal population and, more importantly, its enrichment among long-lived humans.

The IGF1 gene is a strong genetic determinant of body size and serum level of IGFI across mammals (16-18). In dogs, the IGF1 promoter has been shown to be the mostIn this region of L1 (Figure 3, residues in hot pink), these results suggest that the Ala-37Thr change may affect ligand binding but to a lesser extent than the mutations that are within the IGF binding pocket. This region also coincides with residues 3444 of the IR that are shown to be important for insulin binding (25). Alignment of IGFIR with the IR shows that Ala-37 is just one residue away from IR Phe-39, a residue important for insulin ligand specificity (26). Ala-37 is also adjacent to a highly conserved stretch of residues beginning with Glu-44, which has an important function for insulin/IR binding (27). Interestingly, IGFIR residues around Ala-37 are highly conserved among distant vertebrate species, indicating that sequence variants most probably affect function. Another mutation found in our screen, Arg-407His, is located in the region of the L2 domain where nonsynonymous mutations display defective proreceptor processing and transport to the plasma membrane without a reduction in ligand affinity (28). Our finding of a reduction in IGFIR levels and concomitant centenarian carrier, possibly resulting from allele-specific differences in mRNA splicing, processing, or translational control and regulation (32). This article provides strong evidence that the IGF1R can be a genetic determinant of human longevity. The role of GH/IGF pathway in human longevity is controversial because of the recognized evolutionary tradeoffs in the modulation of lifespan. Our findings suggest that IGF-related longevity genes do exist in human populations. Although these data suggest that such alterations occur at low frequency in human centenarians, more exhaustive studies will clarify whether longevity assuring genetic factors and related phenotypes exist for other components of the GH/IGF pathway. Indeed, our results suggest that centenarians may harbor individually rare but collectively more common genetic variations in genes encoding components of the GH/IGF signaling pathway. Additional comprehensive studies in the centenarians and their offspring may reveal other molecules within the GH/IGF pathway that are operative in human longevity. 

Mutation Screening of IGF1 and IGF1R. We screened genomic DNA isolated from blood of centenarians and controls to discover all possible genetic variations in the full coding sequence and intron/exon boundaries of the IGF1 and IGF1R genes by 2D gene scanning (35). To increase specificity, PCR amplification was designed in two steps. First, two multiplex long-distance PCR co-amplified 12 large fragments encompassing coding and splicing junction regions of IGF1 and IGF1R. These products served as a template for four multiplex short PCRs to amplify all target regions in 30 fragments (5 fragments for IGF1 and 25 fragments for IGF1R). Primers are listed in supporting information (SI) Table 3. The mixture of amplicons after heteroduplexing was then separated on the basis of size and melting temperature in a 2D gel. DNA fragments containing heterozygous sequence variation were then re-amplified from the genomic DNA and sequenced to identify the position and nature of sequence variation.

Population and Sample Collection. In a case-control study, Ashkenazi Jews were recruited as described (13, 14, 33). This population derived from an undetermined small number (estimated to be several thousands) of founders. External factors, including ecclesiastical edicts prohibiting all social contact with Jews, the Crusades, the establishment of the Pale of Settlement, numerous pogroms, and ethnic bigotry resulted in social isolation and inbreeding of the Ashkenazi Jews (34). Three hundred eighty-four probands with exceptional longevity [286 females and 98 males, average age 97.7 (0.2) years (mean SE), age range 95108 years; 20% over the age of 100] were recruited to participate in the study. The participants' ages were defined by birth certificates or dates of birth as stated on passports. Probands were required to be living independently at 95 years of age as a reflection of good health, although at the time of recruitment, they could be at any institution or level of dependency. In addition, probands had to have a first-degree offspring who was willing to participate in the study. The offspring group consisted of 114 females and 174 males [mean age 67.8 (0.46) years (mean SE), range 4988 years]. We further established a unique cohort of Ashkenazi Jewish descent without a family history of unusual longevity (approximate age 70 years) that served as controls [n=312, mean age 79.5 (0.4) years (mean SE), 57% female]. A research nurse visited the probands in the morning to draw a venous blood sample,I'm sorry, but I don't see any text enclosed in ``` ``` for me to proofread and improve. Could you please provide me with the text to work on?