Elixir Pharmaceuticals, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Genetics Division, Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston Medical Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Foundation Jean Dausset Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain, and Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Whitehead Massachusetts Institute of Technology Center for Genome Research were genotyped. The study aimed to identify genes impacting lifespan by performing a haplotype-based fine-mapping study of the interval containing (cid:1)50 putative genes. A haplotype marker within microsomal transfer protein (MTP) was identified as a modifier of human lifespan. The same variant was tested in a second cohort of long-lived individuals (LLI) from France, and although the association was not replicated, there was evidence for statistical distortion in the form of Hardy Weinberg disequilibrium. Microsomal transfer protein has been identified as the rate-limiting step in lipoprotein synthesis and may affect longevity by subtly modulating this pathway.

The study sample consisted of 653 individuals (197 males and 456 females) aged 98 years and older, recruited through various institutions. A follow-up study investigating LLI from France also demonstrated statistical distortion at MTP but did not completely confirm the observations from the U.S. cohort. The genetic influence of achieving extreme old age might be even greater than that of average life expectancy. Male and female siblings of centenarians have a 17- and 8-fold greater relative risk, respectively, of surviving to age 100.

Genotyping was performed on both cohorts using different platforms. Potential single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were retrieved from the Human Genome Draft database, and assays were designed to be multiplexed up to five times. SNP genotyping on the U.S. cohort was performed using chip-based matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight MS (DNA MASSARRAY) on PCR-based extension products from individual DNA samples. SNP genotyping for the French cohort was performed on the TaqMan platform based on PCR sequence amplification of genomic DNA followed by fluorometric detection using allele-specific TaqMan Minor Groove Binder fluorescence-labeled probes.

Sixty random SNP markers were genotyped in 250 cases and 463 controls of the U.S. collection for proactive sample matching. Homozygotes for the minor allele were assigned the value 1, heterozygotes 0, and major allele homozygotes 1. Based on the multivariate means calculated from this coded data, a subgroup of the 250 controls was selected that minimized the Mahalanobis distance with respect to the case samples. Sequencing was performed on PCR products purified using RapXtract, and quality scores were determined using PHRED program. SEQUENCER was used for sequence comparisons and SNP detection.

For haplotype reconstruction, 19 familial trios (mother, father, and offspring) were genotyped at densely spaced SNP markers to create a haplotype map of the 12 million-bp region of interest. A haplotype was defined as a contiguous region of DNA with little evidence (2.5%) for meiotic recombination within the common genetic history of the individuals genotyped.

In conclusion, this study provides proof of concept for the feasibility of using the genomes of LLI to identify genes impacting longevity.The Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain repository genotyped all selected markers. Of the 2,000 markers, 1,494 had high confidence calls on the MASSARRAY platform. Among those markers, 990 had a minor allele frequency of at least 5%. SNPs with lower heterozygosity were excluded as they have reduced power in mapping complex traits in association studies of limited sample sizes. Out of the remaining SNPs, 113 were eliminated because the frequency distribution of homozygotes and heterozygotes was not statistically compatible with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE). These failures were attributed to systematic artifacts introduced by the genotyping platform. The use of familial trios allowed for a Mendelian check on the validity of each SNP assay. If more than one Mendelian inheritance error per assay was detected within the 19 trios, the assay was judged unreliable. In situations where boundaries were ambiguous, a heuristic was applied that assigned boundaries to minimize the size (i.e., base pairs) within each block. Once haplotype boundaries were assigned, haplotype frequencies were estimated for each haplotype allele using a maximization algorithm (14). Any haplotype with a frequency of less than 2.5% was excluded from further analysis due to possible errors in either genotyping or estimation processes. Within each haplotype block, between two and six SNP-based haplotypes were observed, and each of these types could be used as genetic markers tested for association.

To reconstruct haplotypes for case-control association studies, the haplotype boundaries and allele frequency estimates established in the trios were used as initial parameters to seed the haplotype allele frequency estimations for genotyping cases and controls. In cases where haplotype data could not be estimated with at least 95% confidence, the haplotype allele was treated as missing. Tests of association used the G test with Williams correction (a statistic following a chi-squared distribution) to test inferences about associating genetic markers (haplotype or SNP) with the longevity phenotype (15). For each allele, 2x2 contingency tables were constructed as allele vs. longevity. For tests where only one direction of allele frequency difference was tested, P values were divided by two.

Smaller genomic regions have been successfully demonstrated by others (16-18), and advantages over single markers have been shown (19-21). In addition, the diversity of the genome can be effectively captured by reducing it to sequential segments of limited diversity (18, 22, 23). Once the common haplotypes within a block have been defined, SNPs within the same block redundant for discriminating between the different haplotypes can be omitted from subsequent typing and analysis. After removing the redundant SNPs, 875 validated SNPs and 700 maximally informative SNPs remained for the association studies. Testing for stratification was performed in the U.S. cohort using 60 random SNP markers genotyped in all cases and controls, and chi-squared values were calculated from the allele counts. Because these SNPs were selected at random, any differences in allele frequencies were inferred as representative of the differences in genetic backgrounds between cases and controls. If the genetic backgrounds of the two-armed study were perfectly matched, the mean chi-squared of the G test statistics for these markers has an expected value.

By densely genotyping across the 12 million-bp region previously identified through the linkage study, we were able to reconstruct a rough draft of the underlying haplotype structure. A total of 195 blocks were defined within the 12 million-bp region, with 2 to 15 SNPs per block. Approximately 75% of the mapped region was within regions of strong linkage disequilibrium. Using this carefully reconstructed assortment of SNP-based haplotype markers, we initiated a case-control association study between groups of unrelated LLI (age). For the French cohort, 57 microsatellites from the Applied Biosystems LMS-MD10 panel located on six different chromosomes (chromosomes 2, 9, 10, 11, 17, and 18) were tested on all cases and controls and checked for stratification by the above method.

Table 1 shows haplotype allele counts/frequencies for the U.S. cohort. Table 3 shows allele counts and frequencies for the U.S. confirmatory sample set. Shown are counts/frequencies for the two-SNP haplotype formed by combining alleles of these SNPs in cases (LLI) and controls. Only three of the four haplotypes were observed, fulfilling the criteria of no historic recombination between the two SNPs. As discussed in the text, the haplotype composed of the rs2866164-G allele and Q95 allele is underrepresented in LLI, suggesting this variant confers mortality risk (P < 0.0005Diverse group. Consequently, our cases and controls would differ not only with respect to the longevity phenotype but also with ethnicity as an uncontrolled confounder. If the effect is strong enough, associations will be found that reflect these ethnic differences rather than differences in lifespan. The mean (cid:1)2 for randomly selected SNP markers (representing differences in genetic background) for the 190 cases and controls used for the first screening showed the absence of stratification ((cid:1)2 mean of 1.07 compared with an expected value of 1.0). Unfortunately, the second set of 190 LLI and controls used to replicate the hypothesis showed moderate stratification ((cid:1)2 mean of 1.7). Although modest, any amount of stratification is undesirable, and the methods of correcting for this potential confounder have not been well validated empirically.

Tables 2 and 4 show the genotyping results for U.S.-based collection confirming the presence of risk SNP allele counts. Note that rs2866164 SNP has multiple twins displaying identical statistical including the (cid:4)493G(cid:2)T SNP. For rs2866164, P is 0.034, and for MTP P is 0.071. P is 0.0006. See Table 1 for details.

Table 5 shows risk allele frequency differences in proactively matched LLI and controls (U.S.-based). The minor allele of rs2866164 is underrepresented in LLI compared to controls (P is 0.0144). There is no evidence in this sample set that the haplotype explains the association better than rs2866164 alone.

Table 7 shows rs2866164 frequency differences in French LLI cohort and controls. The minor allele of rs2866164 is underrepresented in LLI compared to controls, but the effect is not statistically significant (P is 0.54).

To avoid correcting for the hundreds of partially independent hypotheses tested with the original sample set and to simultaneously eliminate stratification as a problem, 250 cases were proactively matched (see Methods) against a new set of 463 controls. Using the approach discussed in Methods, a subgroup of 250 controls was selected that best matched the cases with respect to genetic background. The mean (cid:1)2 for this group of samples (measured using a second, independent set of 60 SNPs) was 0.92, indicating a very high level of genetic balance. It should be emphasized that none of these samples were used in tier I to generate the single inference that the risk allele was underrepresented in LLI. The association at rs2866164 was confirmed with this well-matched group of cases and controls (P is 0.0144 by one-sided G test, relative risk 0.69, Table 5). The two-SNP haplotype also demonstrated an association (P is 0.0124, Table 6).

After fully characterizing the MTP finding, there remained the possibility that one or more additional genes associated with longevity could be contributing to the linkage peak. To address this, any SNP or SNP-based haplotype genotyped in the first tier of samples associated at P is 0.05 was genotyped in the second tier of 190 cases and controls. None of these putative associations was replicated.

MTP resequencing showed that none of the identified SNPs explained the association better than rs2866164. Sixty-one of these SNPs (named MTP001, MTP002 etc.) were novel to our study. After adding the additional SNPs to the map, a new block structure was defined with significant changes (Fig. 1b).

Although apparently a discrepancy (a significant and replicated finding not validated in a third sample), the most likely explanation is a lack of power of individual studies. If one examines the odds ratios estimated for the two unstratified U.S. studies [combined OR 0.72 (0.58, 0.89)] and the French study [OR 0.94 (0.78, 1.14)], we see their confidence bounds overlap significantly (suggesting no discrepancy).Necessarily exists). Taking a plausible intermediate genetic model to explain this association to exceptional longevity consistently (e.g., frequency 0.70, genotype relative risk 0.83), we find that even a sample as large as the French replication sample of 500 cases and 500 controls would have only 50% power to reach nominal statistical significance (P < 0.05) given the modest individual effect of this allele. Thus, even if we assume the effect is true and present equally in all study samples, half of all studies of this magnitude will record a nominally negative result (P < 0.05). This calculation underscores the general observation that association studies of complex phenotypes are likely to require extremely large samples to convincingly elucidate the modest genetic influences involved. Other groups have found genetic associations between MTP and several phenotypes including lipoprotein profiles, insulin resistance, and fat distribution, and most of these studies focused on the 493G T marker (3844). Like so many other mapping studies of complex traits, the literature surrounding MTP has been complex and often contradictory, although as a general trend the 493T allele has been associated with detrimental phenotypes. The known activity of MTP, as a rate-limiting step in lipid metabolism, lends functional credibility to our association of MTP with human longevity. Coronary artery disease and other vasculopathies attributed to unfavorable lipid profiles (peripheral vascular disease, renal-vascular disease, and stroke) account for a large percentage of human mortality. Common genetic variants that impact the function of lipid metabolism should be expected to impact human lifespan; for example, the offspring of centenarians have higher levels of high-density lipoprotein (good cholesterol) and lower levels of low-density lipoprotein (bad cholesterol) than age-matched controls, and they demonstrate significantly lower risks of heart disease and stroke compared with age-matched controls (45, 46). In addition, a longevity syndrome was described among families with extremely low levels of low-density lipoprotein particles (47). Although reasonable to believe that the impact of MTP on human longevity is through its impact on lipid profiles, the association studies above suggest that this gene may also affect susceptibility to insulin resistance and obesity. Although not necessary to explain the data, it is worth noting that other factors could very likely contribute to inconsistency among the studies. Among the possibilities relevant to this particular study are two worth noting: risk allele in the different populations. Diet is one obvious possibility; the culinary tastes of Europeans and Americans may place different stresses on equivalent genetic backgrounds. The interaction between the ApoE gene, diet, genetic background, and other covariates has now been well documented (27, 28), and it is reasonable to assume that much of the variance in human longevity will be explained by complex interactions between environment and genetics. MTP and ApoE. There are many parallels between the associations of MTP and ApoE. Both genes are risk factors implicated in cardiovascular disease and longevity, the latter being also being associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). In light of this, it would be intriguing to explore the genetic epidemiology of MTP with respect to diseases of aging, such as AD. Using the well-matched set of 250 LLI and controls, we confirmed in our LLI and control samples that the ApoE2 allele is protective (12% vs. 7%), the 3 allele is neutral (83% vs. 80%), and the 4 allele is detrimental (5% vs. 13%) with respect to lifespan extension (P < 0.0001, Table 10, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS website). No interaction between the MTP and ApoE alleles with respect to lifespan was detected, although the sample size may have been inadequate. (ii) The American and French samples have important phenotypic differences. For example, the average age of the American controls was much younger than the French controls. Second, the French study involved a smaller fraction of male centenarians compared with the American study. Because the ascertainment strategies were different for the two studies, this may at least partially explain this discrepancy. Implications. Our study lends credence to the claim that centenarians and near-centenarians offer an appealing model for studying human longevity and disease resistance (45). We have confirmed the hypothesis that a population that has escaped or delayed the lethal pathologies of old age is likely to be helpful in studies to detect genetic factors that impact the diseases of aging (48). By systematically examining a large stretch of the genome for genes associated with a phenotype, we have provided credibility to the use of public gene maps and SNP databases to perform studies of the full genome. As our study mapped 0.5% of the genome, it would have required a 200 times larger study to scan the entire genome. Because MTP can explain only a smallGoldstein, D. B. (2001) Gen. Epidemiol. 20, 416.
26. Nielsen, D. M., Ehm, M. G. & Weir, B. S. (1998) Am. J. Hum. Genet.
Son, K. () Eur. J. Hum. Genet.
Perls, T., Shea-Drinkwater, M., Bowen-Flynn, J., Ridge, S., Kang, S., Joyce, E., Daly, M., Brewster, S. J., Kunkel, L. M. & Puca, A. A. () J. Am. Geriatr. Soc.
Herskind, A.M., Muegge, M., Holm, N.V., Sorensen, T.I., Harvald, B. & Vaupel, J.W.() Hum. Genet.
Muegge, M., Vaupel, J.W., Holm, N.& Harvald,B().J.Gerontol.,
Perls,T.,Kunkel,L.&Puca,A.( ) Curr.Opin.Genet.Dev.,
Perls,T.,Wilmoth,J.,Levenson,R.,Drinkwater,M.,Cohen,M.,Bogan,H.,Joyce,E.,Brewster,S.J.,Kunkel,L.M.&Puca,A.A.( ) Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA,
van Bockxmeer,F.M.( ) Nat.Genet.,
Schachter,F.,Faure-Delanef,L.,Guenot,F.,Rouger,H.,Froguel,P.,
Lesueur-Ginot,L.&Cohen,D.( ) Nat.Genet.,
Arking,D.E.,Krebsova,A.,Macek,M.Sr.Macek,M.Jr.Arking,A.,
Mian,I.S.,Fried,L.,Hamosh,A.,Dey,S.,McIntosh,I.&Dietz,H.C.( ) Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA,
Kervinen,K.,Savolainen,M.J.,Salokannel,J.,Hynninen,A.,
Heikkinen,J.,Ehnholm,C.,Koistinen,M.J.&Kesaniemi,Y.A.( ) Atherosclerosis,
Schachter,F. () Am. J. Hum. Genet.,
Wachter,K.W. () In Between Zeus and the Salmon: The Biodemography of Longevity (Natl. Acad. Press, Washington, DC).
Puca,A.A.,Daly,M.J.,Brewster,S.J.,Matise,T.C.,Barrett,J.,
Shea-Drinkwater,M.,Kang,S.,Joyce,E.,Nicoli,J.,Benson,E.,et al.( ) Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA,
Excoffier,L.&Slatkin,M.( ) Mol.Biol.Evol.,
Sokal,R.R.&Rohlf,F.J.( ) Biometry (Freeman, New York).
Daly,M.J.,Rioux,J.D.,Schaffner,S.F.,Hudson,T.J.&Lander,E.S.( ) Nat.Genet.,
Rioux,J.D.,Daly,M.J.,Silverberg,M.S.,Lindblad,K.,
Steinhart,H.,Cohen,Z.,Delmonte,T.,Kocher,K.,Miller,K.,
Guschwan,S.et al.( ) Nat.Genet.,
Johnson,G.C.,Esposito,L.,Barratt,B.J.,Smith,A.N.,
Heward,J.,Denova,G.,Ueda,H.,Cordell,H.J.,
Eaves,I.A.,Dudbridge,F.et al.( ) Nat.Genet.,
De Benedictis,G.,Falcone,E.,Rose,G.,Ruffolo,R.,Spadafora,P.,
Baggio,G.,Bertolini,S.,Mari,D.,Mattace,R.,Monti,D.et al.( ) Hum.Genet.,
Stephens,J.C.( ) Mol.Diagn.,
Davidson,S.( ) Nat.Biotechnol.,
Patil,N.,Berno,A.J.,Hinds,D.A.,Barrett,W.A.,Doshi,J.M.,
Hacker,C.R.,Kautzer,C.R.,Lee,D.H.,Marjoribanks,C.,
Monough,D.P.et al.( ) Science,
Stephens,J.C.,Schneider,J.A.,Tanguay,D.A.,Choi,J.,
Acharya,T.,Stanley,S.E.,Jiang,R.,Messer,C.J.,
Chew,A.,Han,J.H.et al.( ) Science,
Hirschhorn,J.N.,Lohmueller,K.,Byrne,E.&Hirschhorn,K.( ) Gen.Med.,
Silverman,J.M.,Smith,C.J.,Marin,D.B.,Birstein,S.,
Mare,M.&Mohs,R.C