Association of human aging with a functional variant of klotho

Dan E. Arking*, Alice Krebsova, Milan Macek Sr., Milan Macek Jr., Albert Arking, I. Saira Mian, Linda Fried, Ada Hamosh*, Srabani Dey*, Iain McIntosh*, and Harry C. Dietz*(cid:1)

*Institute of Genetic Medicine, (cid:1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205; Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Genetics, Cystic Fibrosis Centre and Centre for Integrated Genomics, University Motol and 2nd School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic; Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218; and Department of Cell and Molecular Biology (MS 74-197), Life Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720

Edited by William S. Sly, St. Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, and approved November 21st, 2001 (received for review September 13th, 2001)

Mice deficient in Klotho gene expression exhibit a syndrome resembling premature human aging. To determine whether variation in the human KLOTHO locus contributes to survival, we applied two newly characterized polymorphic microsatellite markers flanking the gene in a population-based association study. In a cohort chosen for its homogeneity - Bohemian Czechs - we demonstrated significant differences in selected marker allele frequencies between newborn and elderly individuals (P < 0.05). These results precipitated a search for functional variants of klotho. We identified an allele termed KL-VS containing six sequence variants in complete linkage disequilibrium. Two of these variants result in amino acid substitutions F352V and C370S. Homozygous elderly individuals were underrepresented in three distinct populations: Bohemian Czechs, Baltimore Caucasians, and Baltimore African-Americans [combined odds ratio (OR) 2.59, P < 0.0023]. In a transient transfection assay, secreted levels of klotho harboring V352 are reduced six-fold, whereas extracellular levels of the S370 form are increased 2.9-fold. The V352S370 double mutant exhibits an intermediate phenotype (1.6-fold increase), providing a rare example of intragenic complementation in cis by human single nucleotide polymorphisms. The remarkable conservation of F352 among homologous proteins suggests that it is functionally important. The corresponding substitution, F289V, in the closest human klotho paralog with a known substrate, cBGL1, completely eliminates its ability to cleave p-nitrophenyl-D-glucoside. These results suggest that the KL-VS allele influences the trafficking and catalytic activity of klotho and that variation in klotho function contributes to heterogeneity in the onset and severity of human aging.

The mechanism of klotho function remains unclear. Recent experiments have shown that endothelium-dependent vasodilation of the aorta and arterioles was impaired in heterozygous klotho mice but could be restored by parabiosis with wild-type mice. In addition, nitric oxide metabolites (NO and NO2) in urine are significantly lower in heterozygous klotho mice. These results suggest that klotho protein may protect the cardiovascular system through endothelium-derived NO production.

Remarkably, in vivo klotho gene delivery can ameliorate vascular endothelial dysfunction, increase nitric oxide production, reduce elevated blood pressure, and prevent medial hypertrophy and perivascular fibrosis in a rat model with multiple atherogenic risk factors including hypertension, diabetes, obesity, and hyperlipidemia.

Human klotho shows 86% amino acid identity with the mouse protein and is encoded by a gene that spans over 50 kb on chromosome 13q12. To date, no premature aging syndromes have been linked to this region. Like the mouse Klotho gene, human KLOTHO encodes both membrane-bound and secreted forms. However, in humans, the secreted form predominates. Expression of KLOTHO mRNA occurs primarily in the placenta, kidney, prostate, and small intestine.

To determine whether the KLOTHO gene is involved in human aging, we used a population-based association study employing two newly characterized flanking microsatellite markers. Marker 1 is located 11 kb 3' of the last exon, and Marker 2 is located 66 kb 5' of the first exon. We present evidence that the KLOTHO locus is associated with human survival defined as postnatal life expectancy and longevity defined as life expectancy after 75. We also identify and(Clontech) - with primers Glu5 and Glu3, using Pfu turbo polymerase (Stratagene). The PCR product was cloned into the N-terminal GST-fusion expression vector pDEST15 by using the GATEWAY cloning system (GIBCO BRL) and verified by direct sequencing. The substitutions F289V and Q307S were introduced as described above. All primer sequences are available on request.

Statistics. Individual allele distributions were analyzed using the fuhahysek/~a GAS package Version 2.3 (http://users.ox.ac.uk/ayoung), and overall marker comparisons were made using the CLUMP program (15), which employs a Monte Carlo-based method for determining P. Individual genotype distributions were analyzed using Pearson's χ2 test (http://home.clara.net/sisa/binomial.htm) and the CLUMP program was used to determine overall significance. Survival advantage or disadvantage was calculated as an odds ratio (OR) with a 95% confidence interval (CI) Ave://b homa/b (http://home.clara.net/sisa/binomial.htm). MantelHaenszel log rank analysis with one-sided P of KaplanMeier survival curves was performed using PRISM, Version 3.0 for Windows (GraphPad, San Diego). The combined population analysis was calculated using the MantelHaenszel estimate of joint OR and significance (16).

Marker Genotyping. Multiple dinucleotide repeat sequences were identified by visual inspection of the genomic sequence for KLOTHO and flanking regions (GenBank accession nos. Z92540 and Z92541). Marker 1 (sense, 5'-CATACGCAGAC-CCAGAGCC; antisense, 5'-GCTTCTCATTACGAAAGTA-CAGCTGGG, italic sequence is a tail to force reaction to completion) is 11 kb 3 of exon 5, and Marker 2 (sense, wwe5/-ns 5'-CTTACCAGCATGTGAGCTATC; antisense, 5'-TTTTA-an5! CAGGTGATCTGAGACTC) is 66 kb 5 of exon 1. Size fractionation of PCR products derived from multiple unrelated individuals was used to demonstrate polymorphic variation (data not shown). Markers were amplified using AmpliTaq Gold (PerkinElmer). Sense primers were fluorescently labeled, and product size was determined using a PerkinElmer (Abd) 373a DNA sequencer.

Results. The initial cohort was comprised of 435 elderly individuals (≥75 years), and 611 contemporary newborns, both drawn at random from the Bohemian Czech population. This group is well suited for an association study because it represents Central European populations without extensive non-European immigration during the past millennium. Both the World Wars of the last century did not cause disproportionate changes in population sex ratios (7). The elderly are considered to be escapees of strong selective pressure that existed before the introduction of modern health care in the early 1900s (childhood mortality 20%). The majority were stratified into the SENIEUR Apparently Healthy (141 subjects) and SENIEUR Inpatient (291 subjects) categories of the EURAGE SENIEUR protocol (7,17).

Mutation Screening. Exons 15 were analyzed by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis as described (12), using 1 TME (500 mM Tris 350 mM MES 10 mM EDTA) buffer, pH 6.8, at room temperature. Exon 1 PCRs were performed using the Advantage-GC Genomic PCR kit (CLONTECH). Exons 25 were amplified using AmpliTaq Gold (PerkinElmer). Primer sequences are available on request.

Tissue Culture, Transfections, and Western Analysis. HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS and an antibiotic-antimycotic mixture (GIBCO BRL). Transfections were carried out with TransIT-HeLaMonster (Panvera, Madison, WI), using 10 g of plasmid per 10-cm-diameter dish. Twenty-four hours post-transfection, the cell culture media was replaced with fresh DMEM supplemented with antibiotic-antimycotic mixture. Forty-eight hours post-transfection, the cell culture media was collected and cells were removed by pelleting before concentration in a Vivaspin 20 concentrator (Vivascience, Gloucestershire, U.K.). Sample volume was brought up to 450 l with 20 mM Tris (pH 7.5) 50 mM NaCl. After adding 150 l of NuPage LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) and 100 l of 1 M DTT, samples were heated to 70indicate significant 2 values (P<0.05). Alleles with frequencies less than 1% in both newborn and elderly groups were not included for analysis but were included to derive the total n. They occur within an 800-bp region spanning exon 2 and flanking sequence (Fig. 1A). Allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization (ASO) analysis was used to demonstrate complete linkage disequilibrium for the coding region mutations (data not shown). Of the three mutations in exon 2, two code for amino acid changes, and one is silent. The change at amino acid position 352 was a phenylalanine to valine substitution. Phenylalanine at this position is likely important to klotho function, as it is remarkably conserved in homologous proteins in eukaryotic organisms (Fig. 1B). The change at amino acid position 370 was a cysteine to serine substitution. Cysteine at this position is only seen in the first family I glycosidase domain of human klotho. Because there is no known klotho substrate, the biochemical consequences of the F352V and C370S amino acid substitutions could not be determined directly. Therefore, we performed enzymatic assays on the closest klotho paralog for which there is a known substrate, human cytosolic β-glucosidase (cBGL1) (20, 21). As in most eukaryotic klotho homologs identified, phenylalanine is found at the position corresponding to klotho amino acid 352 (amino acid 289); however, neither cysteine nor serine is found at the position corresponding to klotho amino acid 370 (amino acid 307; Fig. 1B). When valine was substituted for phenylalanine at amino acid position 289, cBGL1 demonstrated a complete loss of ability to cleave 6-1 p-nitrophenyl-β-D-glucoside (Fig. 4 A and B). The introduction of serine at amino acid position 307 was unable to restore activity (Fig. 4 C and D). The creation of a Mae III restriction site by the F352V mutation allowed for efficient genotyping of large populations. The genotype distribution was different between newborn and elderly Bohemian Czech individuals (P<0.03), with heterozygosity for these mutations more prevalent in the elderly (P<0.04) and a trend suggesting that homozygosity is more prevalent in newborns (P<0.08; Table 2). These data indicate a survival advantage for heterozygosity, with a 1.43-fold (95% CI 1.02-2.01) increased survival rate to age 75 and suggest a 2.70-fold (95% CI 0.84-8.69) survival disadvantage for homozygosity of this allele. No significant differences were seen when the population was stratified by sex or health status (data not shown). The KL-VS allele is found on multiple marker allele haplotypes, and it is negatively associated with Marker 1 Allele 17 (P<0.04), indicating that there are additional deleterious mutations in KLOTHO that have yet to be identified.

Discussion

Disruption of the mouse klotho gene results in a syndrome resembling human aging, with phenotypes including atherosclerosis, emphysema, osteoporosis, and infertility (1). We therefore decided to explore the role of KLOTHO in human aging by using a population-based association study. We identified an allele of KLOTHO, termed KL-VS, defined by the presence of six SNPs in complete linkage disequilibrium. A homozygous disadvantage for KL-VS carriers was seen in three geographically and/or ethnically distinct populations (P<0.0023). Interestingly, heterozygote advantage was seen in the Bohemian Czech population (P<0.04), but not in either of the Baltimore populations. Multiple examples of heterozygote advantage with homozygote disadvantage exist, including both CFTR allele waif508 (22) and hemoglobin S (23). The heterozygote advantage displayed by these alleles is associated with specific environmental pressures, cholera and malaria, respectively. It is therefore plausible that the apparent lack of heterozygote advantage in the two Baltimore groups may manifest the absence of an environmental pressure that was specific to the Bohemian Czech population. A homozygote disadvantage can generally be observed independent of environmental factors.

One aging theory, antagonistic pleiotropy, proposes that individuals with alleles that are beneficial to survival through reproductive age could be selected for by evolution even if the same alleles had negative effects atCharacteristics of Family 1 glycosidases (2) show that it is essential for export out of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (18, 19). Extracellular levels of klotho protein harboring V352 are reduced by 6-fold, but it is yet to be determined whether this mutation influences klotho dimerization or interaction with other proteins required for klotho export, such as ER chaperones. Interestingly, extracellular levels of klotho harboring S370 are increased by 2.9-fold and have the ability to complement the V352 phenotype in cis, as demonstrated by the V352 S370 double mutant which exhibits an intermediate phenotype (1.6-fold increase).

In screening a total of over 300 individuals taken from the geographically and ethnically distinct cohorts used in this study, no individuals were found who harbor only V352 or S370. It is possible that neither genotype is viable if secretion is essential to klotho function. In this scenario, the V352 phenotype would correspond to that of a severe hypomorph similar to the klotho mouse and would be negatively selected. Likewise, if the homozygous disadvantage exhibited by KL-VS allele-containing individuals is due, at least in part, to increased extracellular klotho levels, individuals harboring only S370 would experience an even greater negative selection.

Multiple models of aging invoke accelerated or excessive posttranslational modification of proteins including glycation. Resultant advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) elicit a wide range of responses that have been proposed to contribute to many age-related phenotypes, including atherosclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, diabetic complications, and microvascular changes (29). It is possible that the proposed glycosidase activity of klotho retards the accumulation of AGEs. Alternatively, klotho may contribute to or regulate signaling cascades with downstream targets that influence aging. These hypotheses remain to be tested in humans or mouse models of normal or accelerated aging.

The remarkable evolutionary conservation of the F352 amino acid among homologous proteins suggests that it is important to klotho function. The substitution of valine for phenylalanine at the corresponding residue in the closest human klotho paralog with a known substrate, cBGL1, completely eliminates the ability to cleave p-nitrophenyl- -D-glucoside. The introduction of serine at the position corresponding to klotho aa 370 failed to restore enzymatic activity. These results suggest that the KL-VS allele may exhibit both altered secretion and a loss of catalytic activity.

We thank Charlotte Ferencz for access to epidemiologic data from the Baltimore-Washington Infant Study (supported by NHLBI R37-HL25629) and Christopher Loffredo for access to samples. We thank Aravinda Chakravarti for useful suggestions. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants AR21135 (to H.C.D.) and AR44702 (to I.M.); Grants IGA MZCR (6497-3, 6411-3, 6462-3, 6250-3, 6464-3, 00000064203) and MSMT CR (ME457, LN00AO79, 111300003) from the Czech Republic (to M.M., Jr., A.K., and M.M., Sr.); and U.S. Department of Energy Contract No. DE-AC03-76SF00098 (to I.S.M.). The Women's Health and Aging Study is supported by NOI-AG-1-2112 (to L.F.). H.C.D. is an investigator in the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

References:

1. Ohyama, Y., Kurabayashi, M., Kaname, T., Kume, E., et al. ( )
2. Mian, I. S. ( )
3. Matsumura, Y., Aizawa, H., Shiraki-Iida, T., Nagai, R., Kuro-o, M. & Nabeshima, Y. ( )
4. Nagai, R., Saito, Y., Ohyama, Y., Aizawa, H., Suga, T., Nakamura, T., Kurabayashi, M. & Kuroo, M. ( )
5. Saito, Y., Nakamura, T., Ohyama, Y., Suzuki, T., Iida, A., Shiraki-Iida, T., Kuro-o, M., Nabeshima, Y., Kurabayashi, M. & Nagai, R. ( )
6. Shiraki-Iida, T., Aizawa, H., Matsumura, Y., Sekine, S., Iida, A., Anazawa, H., Nagai, RI'm sorry, but there is not enough context to determine what corrections or improvements need to be made to the text. Please provide more information or the complete text.