Association of FOXO3A Variation with Human Longevity Confirmed in German Centenarians

Friederike Flachsbart, Amke Caliebeb, Rabea Kleindorp, Helene Blanche, Hubert von Susanna Nikolaus, Stefan Schreiber, and Almut Nebel conducted a study to investigate the association between FOXO3A variation and human longevity. The study was conducted at the Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical Informatics and Statistics, and Popgen Biobank at Christian-Albrechts-University in Kiel, Germany, and Fondation Jean Dausset, Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain in Paris, France. The study aimed to replicate a previous finding that identified three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the FOXO3A gene that were associated with longevity in a sample of long-lived men of Japanese ancestry.

The researchers investigated 16 known SNPs in FOXO3A and found evidence that polymorphisms in this gene are associated with the ability to attain exceptional old age. Their findings confirmed the initial discovery in the Japanese sample and support FOXO3A as a susceptibility gene for prolonged survival in humans.

FOXO3A is a gene that encodes a key regulator of the insulinIGF1 signaling pathway known to influence metabolism and lifespan in model organisms. The DAF-16 protein is a transcription factor and an evolutionarily conserved key regulator of this pathway that influences metabolism and lifespan in model organisms. These aspects also render FOXO3A a very likely candidate for genetic longevity studies in humans.

The study analyzed 16 polymorphisms in FOXO3A for association with human longevity phenotype. All SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) in the control population. For the association analyses, they compared German long-lived individuals (subset A; n 1,031; aged 95-110 years) and a centenarian subset (subset B; n 388) to appropriately matched younger controls (n 731; aged 60-75 years). All markers were subjected to allelic case-control comparisons (CCA) using the entire LLI sample (subset A) and the centenarian subset (subset B). For subset A, single-marker analysis revealed four SNPs with nominally significant P values CCA. For the centenarians (subset B), 11 SNPs showed significant association.

The study found that the FOXO3A association was considerably stronger in centenarians than in nonagenarians, highlighting the importance of centenarians for genetic longevity research. The researchers extended the initial finding observed in Japanese men to women and indicated that both genders were likely to be equally affected by variation in FOXO3A. Replication in a French centenarian sample generated a trend that supported the previous results.

In conclusion, this study provides evidence that FOXO3A variation is associated with human longevity and supports FOXO3A as a susceptibility gene for prolonged survival in humans.and rs479744). The lack of association in the Dutch study may be due to the smaller sample size and the different age range of the participants. In summary, our study did not find evidence for an association between FOXO3A variation and longevity in Germans and French centenarians. However, our results do not exclude the possibility that FOXO3A may influence longevity in other populations or that other genes in the FOXO pathway may play a role. Further studies are needed to fully understand the genetic basis of human longevity.rs12200646 and rs13220810) were tested, and three of them showed significant association in German centenarians, unlike the Leiden results (Table 2). Additionally, rs2153960, one of the SNPs tested in the Dutch sample, showed strong LD with rs13217795, which was highly associated in Japanese men from Hawaii (P At AL> 0.0006; r2 0.88 between rs13217795 and rs2153960 according to CEU HapMap data; Table 3). The two Dutch cohorts' data were previously analyzed using a longitudinal design that included information on mortality and age-related phenotypes (15). Kuningas et al. (15) found that carriers of a specific 4-SNP haplotype (GAGC from rs2802288, rs2883881, rs12200646, and rs13220810) had an increased risk of all-cause and cardiovascular mortalities. However, the effects were small, and the findings did not hold up to multiple testing (15). These four SNPs were also subjected to haplotype analysis in our sample collection. Although risk alleles or haplotypes for age-related diseases are expected to decrease in frequency in population strata of increasing age (16), the mortality haplotype identified in the Dutch was not significantly depleted in German centenarians compared with younger controls (0.212 in centenarians versus 0.238 in controls; P 0.17). 

The study by Willcox et al. did not find any association with FOXO3A in their cross-sectional comparisons. Our results highlight the relevance of centenarians for genetic longevity research because they are more valuable for such studies than octogenarians and nonagenarians. This finding may be attributed to the fact that centenarians represent the top percentiles of their respective birth cohort-specific age distributions and have outlived most of their peers by several decades. Only 4% of male and 5.6% of female 90-year-olds and 15-17% of 95-year-olds in Germany are likely to become 100 years themselves (Human Mortality Database, www.mortality.org), indicating that centenarians represent a highly selected phenotype even among LLI. Because the genetic contribution to survival is strongest at very advanced ages (4), centenarians may be particularly enriched for beneficial variants in longevity assurance genes (16). Hence, it would seem that centenarians are the more suitable but rarer phenotype for genetic longevity studies.

Recently, variation in FOXO3A was shown to be associated with longevity in a discovery cohort comprising 213 long-lived men of Japanese ancestry (95-106 years) and 402 younger probands (73-81 years) (12). Our study of 1,762 German centenarians, nonagenarians, and controls provides independent evidence that FOXO3A is a susceptibility gene for prolonged survival. As can be expected for a polygenic trait like longevity, the effect was rather modest (demonstrated by an OR of 1.42 for the top-ranking marker rs3800231; Table 2). However, because the association has been observed in two genetically diverse groups of European and Asian descent, our results render FOXO3A a modifier of general relevance that may play a role in many human populations. The analysis in the French centenarian sample generated a trend that supported the findings in the Japanese and German collections but did not yield a statistically robust replication result. The validation could have been hindered by low levels of undetected population structure, but as demonstrated previously, the French sample shows no evidence of stratification (17). Another explanation might be the younger age of the French controls (18-70 years). This idea is supported by the fact that the estimated OR was larger when only controls aged 60-70 years were used for analysis. The resulting P CCA value still did not reach significance, which is possibly caused by the small number of available older controls (n Po, 137). The lack of reproducibility presents a well-known problem of case-control studies. To prove the validity of association results, confirmation in independent and larger samples is generally mandatory. However, this requirement may sometimes be difficult to achieve when polygenic traits, such as human longevity, are analyzed for which only modest or weak effects are predicted (5). This problem is aggravated in underpowered experiments where the sizes of appropriate samples are relatively small. The French centenarian-control collection used in this study is one of the largest to date and yet had only an a priori power of 47% to confirm the association of the FOXO3A SNP rs768023 (assuming the same allele frequencies as in the German centenarian and control samples).

The age of the cases is crucial in genetic longevity research. In our study, the association of FOXO3A revealedThe text contains several errors and inconsistencies that need to be corrected. The processed text with the required corrections is given below.

Processed Text:
The centenarian sample answered matched for sex and geographic origin with healthy control individuals (553 younger controls ranged from 18 to 70 years; mean 51.2 years). The gender ratio of the sample was 83.6% females vs. 16.4% males. To test for population stratification, 57 microsatellites from the Applied Biosystems LMS-MD10 panel that were located on 6 different chromosomes (chromosomes 2, 9, 10, 11, 17, and 18) were tested in all cases and controls. Chi-squared (χ²) values were calculated from the allele counts. The obtained mean χ² of the G test statistics for the markers was 1.00, which reflected the good matching of the French sample collection (17). All German and French subjects gave informed, written consent before participation. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Hospital Saint-Antoine in Paris.

Another difference between the two investigations may be the type of effect. The odds ratios (ORs) in the Japanese suggested an additive mechanism (12), whereas in the German sample, the data implicated a dominant-recessive effect. However, the large confidence intervals for the ORs in both studies imply some uncertainty. The future challenge is to investigate whether the observed discrepancies in the strength and kind of the FOXO3A effect can be verified and, if so, to clarify whether they are caused by study design, population- and/or gender-specific differences or some other factors.

There is growing evidence for an important role of the FOXO3A protein in healthy human aging. It has been shown to control insulin sensitivity and influence coronary heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and longevity. These functions are indicative of a master regulator in the IIS pathway, and allelic variation in the transcription factor FOXO3A may modulate a broad array of downstream targets that could exhibit larger effects on extending lifespan (12). The association findings in two independent populations of diverse origin confirm FOXO3A as a genetic susceptibility factor for human longevity.

Genotyping. Genotyping of the German and French samples was performed with Taqman SNP Genotyping Assays (Applied Biosystems) on an automated platform (23).

Statistical Analysis. Single-marker case-control analyses on allele and genotype frequency data were performed with χ² statistics by using the open-source software GENOMIZER (24) (www.ikmb.uni-kiel.de/software.html). P < 0.05 was considered significant. All analyzed SNPs had a minimal overall call rate of 98% and were tested for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) in controls before inclusion in the analyses (P > 0.05). The LD structure was determined from HapMap data HWE (CEU and JPT; www.hapmap.org) with the Haploview v4.0 program (http://www.broad.mit.edu/mpg/haploview) (25). The Haploview program was also used for selection of tagging SNPs based on the HapMap genotypes of Europeans with the pairwise r² > 0.8; P < 0.01 HWE and for the haplotype analysis.

Study Population. A total sample of 1,031 unrelated German LLI was studied that were recruited from different geographic regions throughout Germany. Nonagenarians and centenarians were between 95 and 110 years of age at the time of recruitment (mean age: 98.4 years). The gender ratio was 74.1% females vs. 25.9% males. A subset comprised 388 centenarians (mean age: 101.6 years). The 731 German younger control subjects were between 60 and 75 years of age (mean age: 67.2 years). There are no mortality data available for the controls. However, based on current predictions, only 1.5% of all 60-year-old and 1.8% of all 75-year-old German females will become 100 years. For males, the probability is even lower (Human Mortality Database; www.demogr.mpg.de). Hence, we can estimate that only 13 of our younger controls (of 731) will become centenarians themselves, a negligible proportion that does not affect power. In Germany, genetic differentiation in population structure is considered to be very low (20). Moreover, the recruited controls match the LLI as closely as possible in terms of ancestry, gender, and geographical origin within the country (13), thus minimizing any systematic genetic differences between the samples that might arise because of very low levels of undetected population structure. The good matching is reflected in a genomic inflation factor λThere is no need for any corrections in this text. It seems like a fragment of a sentence, but as it stands alone, there is no need to modify it.