Genetic variation in human telomerase is associated with telomere length in Ashkenazi centenarians. Gil Atzmona,b,1,2, Miook Choa,1, Richard M. Cawthonc, Temuri Budagovb, Micol Katzb, Xiaoman Yangb, Glenn Siegelb, Aviv Bergmand, Derek M. Huffmana,b, Clyde B. Schechtere, Woodring E. Wrightf, Jerry W. Shayf, Nir Barzilaia,b, Diddahally R. Govindarajug, and Yousin Suha,b,2.

Departments of Medicine and Genetics at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in Bronx NY 10461 collaborated to study the inheritance and maintenance of telomere length and variations in two major genes associated with telomerase enzyme activity (hTERT and hTERC) in a cohort of Ashkenazi Jewish centenarians and their offspring. The results indicate that centenarians and their offspring maintain longer telomeres compared to controls with advancing age. Longer telomeres are associated with protection from age-related diseases, better cognitive function, and lipid profiles of healthy aging. Thus, variations in human telomerase gene associated with better maintenance of telomere length may confer healthy aging and exceptional longevity in humans.

Telomeres consist of TTAGGG tandem repeats at the ends of chromosomes and protect these regions from degradation and DNA repair activities. Telomeres progressively shorten with each cell division until a critically shortened length is achieved upon which the cells enter replicative senescence. Telomere shortening may be associated with organismal aging with concomitant metabolic decline and increased risk for disease and death. Shorter telomere length has been shown to be associated with age-related diseases including coronary heart disease, hypertension and dementia as well as general risk factors for disease such as insulin resistance and obesity. Furthermore, oxidative stress and inflammation, two major postulated causal factors of aging, are known to accelerate telomere shortening. Telomere length may be an important biomarker of aging because it reflects the cumulative burden of oxidative stress and inflammation.

Phenotypes of centenarians, their offspring (approximate age of 70 years), offspring-matched controls without a family history of longevity, all of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, were studied. The results indicate that centenarians and their offspring maintain longer telomeres compared to controls with advancing age. High heritability (86%) for telomere length between centenarians and their offspring was observed, suggesting that telomere length has a strong genetic component in families with exceptional longevity.When controls and centenarians are combined to represent cross-sectional age groups of unrelated individuals from middle age to oldest old (range: 43-105 years), telomere length declines with age until the age of 85 years (Fig. 1). However, individuals older than 86 years of age as well as the centenarians show longer telomere lengths compared with unrelated individuals younger than 85 years of age, with a mean difference of 0.17 (±0.04) in the linear regression model adjusting for age and gender. The telomere length of offspring exceeds that of controls in a hierarchical linear model, on average by 0.082 [95% confidence interval (CI): 0.017-0.148; P = 0.014]. Because centenarians and their offspring are appreciable singleton families, we used the regression approach for non-independencies of the observed subjects. To account for parametric model bias as well as for unknown sequence variants in the gene, among which 5 were previously unknown unique variants that were not reported in various SNP databases (Table 3). The locations of these variants are shown in Fig. 4. Nine variants in the hTERT gene are in the coding region, including two nonsynonymous variants, 893 G > A (Ala-279 Thr) and 3242 G > A (Ala-1062 Thr), which are rare and found only in controls (Table 3). In silico analysis using SIFT (sorts intolerant from tolerant substitutions) (30) and PolyPhen (31), which predict the effects of amino acid changes on protein function, indicates that these changes are likely to be benign. Interestingly, rare synonymous or intronic variants in hTERT are enriched in centenarians (n = 19) compared with controls (n = 3) (Table 2; P = 0.041). In addition, three previously un-described intronic variants in hTERC were also found, two of which were rare and found only in centenarians (Table 3).

Telomere Length, Age-Associated Diseases, and Lipid Profiles of Healthy Aging. Association analysis between telomere and major age-related diseases among centenarians, their offspring, and controls indicated that significantly shorter telomere lengths (adjusted for age, gender, and group) are present in subjects with hypertension (P = 0.006), the metabolic syndrome (P = 0.03), or diabetes (P = 0.03) compared with those without these disorders (Fig. 2). Moreover, when we tested the relation between telomere length and cognitive function in centenarians, those with impaired cognitive [Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score <25] had significantly shorter telomeres compared with those with normal cognitive function after adjustment for age and gender (Fig. 2; P = 0.02). We then tested whether telomere length correlated with the lipid profiles, which are known predictors of aging-related diseases such as coronary artery and metabolic syndromes (29). These analyses revealed that telomere length is associated with the lipid profiles of aging, showing a positive association with increased sizes of LDL (P = 0.0001) and HDL (P = 0.03), percentage large particle sizes of LDL (P = 0.0002) and HDL (P = 0.01), and levels of Apo-A1 (P = 0.005) and HDL (P = 0.04) (Table), whereas there is a negative association with very LDL (P = 0.008). Total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL, and VLDL levels show no significant correlation (Table 2). These suggest that longer telomeres are positively correlated with lipid profiles of healthy aging.

We genotyped the four common hTERT variants, with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of >5% [IVS1 187T>C, 973G>A (Ala-305 Ala), 3097 C>T (His-1013 His), IVS16+99 C>T], in 73 centenarians and 49 controls. Information on telomere length was available for all these individuals. We did not find an association of the IVS1 187 T>C, 973 G>A (Ala-305 Ala), and IVS16+99 C>T with longevity. However, significant associations were detected with the 3097 C>T (His-1013 His) variant: the T allele is significantly enriched in centenarians (21.8%) compared with controls (8.2%; P = 0.026) (Table 3), and both CT and TT genotypes are significantly enriched in centenarians compared with controls (26.Offspring and controls' lipid profiles are known predictors of age-related diseases. Previously, we demonstrated that centenarians and their offspring have significantly larger HDL and LDL particle sizes, which are heritable phenotypes associated with a lower prevalence of morbidity. Our findings indicate that longer telomeres are associated with a lower prevalence of hypertension, metabolic syndrome, type 2 diabetes, better cognitive function, and healthier lipid profiles. 

Discussion: Several studies have highlighted a close relationship between telomere length and lifespan in humans, including long-lived humans. However, the interpretations of results from these studies are often confounded by a lack of adequate controls. To overcome this shortcoming, we employed a unique study design in a cohort of Ashkenazi Jewish individuals with exceptional longevity (centenarians), their offspring (approximately 70 years old), and age- and gender-matched controls without a family history of unusual longevity. Using the offspring of individuals with exceptional longevity and their matched controls provides a powerful approach to identify genetic factors associated with healthy aging.

Telomere length is a quantitative trait that is fairly well studied, but the genetic factors that influence it are not well understood. Recent studies suggest that heterozygote mutations in hTERC and hTERT genes, which are essential components of telomerase, show defective phenotypes in several diseases, indicating that half the usual dose of telomerase is inadequate for maintaining telomeres with normal length. Because living to 100 years is a rare phenotype in humans, with a prevalence of 1 in 10,000 individuals in the general population, we hypothesized that centenarians may harbor rare gain-of-function mutations in the telomerase genes that may also influence the length of telomeres.

Sequence analysis of hTERT and hTERC genes revealed that rare synonymous or intronic variants are enriched in centenarians compared to controls. In contrast, centenarians are completely devoid of nonsynonymous variants, whereas there are two control individuals who carry heterozygote nonsynonymous variants, 893 G>A (Ala-279 Thr) and 3148 G>A (Ala-1050 Thr). Although these nonsynonymous changes are predicted to be functionally benign, they are also found in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) patients with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of 5%, raising the possibility that these variants may have negative functional effects.

Our study also revealed that common genetic variations in hTERT may influence the telomere length maintenance associated with longer telomeres in families with exceptional longevity. The expression level of hTERT is a major determinant of telomerase activity. Recent studies indicate that telomerase activation can be regulated by environmental interventions such as lifestyle changes or stress management. There are functional hTERT promoter variants known to influence telomerase expression and telomere length. However, because there is very little linkage disequilibrium in the gene, it is unlikely that the centenarian-enriched rare variants are proxies of functional hTERT variants in the promoter. It is tempting to speculate that the rare variants might influence expression of hTERT in response to environmental stresses such as inflammation or oxidative stress, which then promotes better maintenance of telomere length. Indeed, mean telomere length is much greater among the carriers of the rare variant compared with the non-carriers after adjusting for age and gender [telomere repeat copy number to single-copy gene copy number (T/S) ratio of 0.62:0.41, crude difference = 0.21; P = 0.02 by Student t-test, P = 0.037 by Mann-Whitney U test], raising the possibility that these rare variants may have a positive functional impact on telomere maintenance.

Haplotypes of the hTERT gene derived from four common variants showed associations with longevity and/or telomere length. These are two intronic variants, IVS1-187 T>C and IVS16+99 C>T, and two synonymous variants, 973 G>A (Ala-305 Ala) and 3097 C>T (His-1013 His). These common variants may contribute to the regulation of gene expression. A common intronic variant of hTERT shown to be associated with susceptibility to IPF may also affect the expression levels of hTERT. Taken together, our study demonstrates that centenarians may harbor individually rare but collectively more common genetic variations in genes involved in the telomere maintenance pathway, implicating a role of regulatory variants in healthy aging.

Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was used to measure relative telomere length. Two sets of qPCR reactions using 2 L of each DNA dilution were carried out in a 20-L volume using the LightCycler FastStart DNA Master SYBR Green kit (Roche Diagnostics), with MgSample Previously Measured

The reproducibility between the two measurements was high (r = 0.94, P < 0.001). Results obtained using this qPCR were highly correlated with those obtained by the traditional terminal restriction fragment length approaches (48). One T/S ratio unit is equivalent to a mean telomere length of 4,270 bp in the leukocytes. The qPCR telomere length determination does not include subtelomeric lengths. The telomerase gene may play a significant role in human longevity and the maintenance of telomere length. In summary, we provide strong correlative evidence that individuals in Ashkenazi Jewish families with exceptional longevity have better maintenance of telomere length, and that the telomerase genes may function as important genetic determinants of both human longevity and telomere length. Additionally, our data suggest that both telomere length and variants of the fl telomerase genes may have a cumulative influence on lower disease prevalence and a favorable lipid profile in centenarians and their offspring. Additional comprehensive studies on genetic and genomic variation of centenarians and their offspring comprising candidate genes, especially those known to play a role in telomere maintenance in model organisms, may reveal previously undescribed genomic regions and molecules that are operative in human health and longevity.

Materials and Methods

Study Design and Subjects

A cohort of Ashkenazi Jews with exceptional longevity was recruited as previously described (34). Proband were required to be living independently at 95 years of age as a reflection of good health, although at the time of recruitment, they could be at any level of dependency. In addition, probands had to have a first-degree offspring who was willing to participate in the study. Birth certificates or dates of birth as stated on passports were used to verify the participants' ages. The Ashkenazi population is descended from a founder population (estimated to be several thousands) originating in the 15th century. This founder effect resulted in a population both culturally and genetically homogeneous, from which several disease-related genes have been successfully identified (45). A majority of these individuals were born in the United States or moved there before World War II. Telomere measurements (see below) were made on 86 Ashkenazi probands (aged 97.4 ± 0.3 years) defined as having exceptional longevity, 175 offspring of parents with exceptional longevity (aged 67.8 ± 0.6 years), and 93 controls who were offspring of parents with usual survival (aged 71.8 ± 1 years). By definition, parents of controls survived to the age of 85 years or less. The control group consisted largely of spouses of the offspring group. Informed written consent was obtained in accordance with the policy of the Committee on Clinical Investigations of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.

Mutation Screening and Genotyping of hTERT and hTERC

We sequenced genomic DNA isolated from blood of centenarians and controls to discover all possible genetic variations in the exonic regions and intron-exon boundaries of the telomerase genes (hTERT and hTERC) by a 2D gene scanning (TDGS) method (49). To increase specificity, PCR amplification was designed in two steps. To begin with, triple-multiplex long-distance PCR co-amplifies eight large fragments encompassing the coding and splicing junction regions of hTERT and hTERC. These products serve as a template for quadruple-multiplex short PCRs to amplify target regions in 18 fragments; 16 fragments for hTERT and two fragments for hTERC. Primers are listed in Table S2. The mixture of amplicons after heteroduplexing was separated on the basis of size and melting temperature in a 2D gel. Then, DNA fragments containing heterozygous sequence variation were re-amplified from the genomic DNA and sequenced to identify the position and nature of sequence variation. For hTERT, exon 1 was analyzed by nucleotide sequencing, and exons 2, 4, and 5 were separately analyzed by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) because of ambiguous melting patterns on a TDGS gel. Genotypes of the common variants in the telomerase gene were determined by DGGE using the same primers designed for the TDGS assay.

For each subject, a detailed medical history, physical examination, and blood sample collection were performed as previously described (23, 32, 34). The presence of hypertension, the metabolic syndrome, and diabetes was determined using National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP), Adult Treatment Panel III (ATP III) criteria (46). Scores on the MMSE (47) 25 were considered to indicate impaired cognitive function. Triglyceride, LDL-cholesterol (LDL), and HDL-cholesterol (HThe observed numbers of each genotype, as compared to those expected under Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, were tested using 2 tests for each of the three groups: centenarians, their offspring, and controls. Samani J et al. investigated atherosclerosis in Lancet. Von Zglinicki T et al. studied short telomeres in patients with vascular dementia and their association with low antioxidative capacity and possible risk factors in Lab Invest. Govindaraju DR et al. researched the genetics of the Framingham Heart Study in Adv Genet. Ng PC and Henikoff S developed SIFT, a method to predict amino acid changes affecting function, in Nucleic Acids Res. Sunyaev S et al. predicted deleterious human alleles in Hum Mol Genet. Atzmon G et al. discovered that plasma HDL levels highly correlate with cognitive function and exceptional longevity in J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. Barzilai N et al. identified a unique lipoprotein phenotype and genotype associated with exceptional longevity in J Am Med Assoc. Artandi SE explored telomeres, telomerase, and human disease in N Engl J Med. Verma S and Slutsky AS provided new insights into idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in N Engl J Med. Perls TT et al. validated reported centenarian prevalence in New England in Age Ageing. Tsakiri KD et al. found that adult-onset pulmonary fibrosis is caused by mutations in telomerase in Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. Kimchi-Sarfaty C et al. discovered a silent polymorphism in the MDR gene substrate specificity that affects function in Science. Qu HQ et al. found evidence for functional effects of synonymous polymorphisms and strand bias complementary single-nucleotide polymorphisms of transcribed human genes in BMC Genomics. Ducrest AL et al. studied the regulation of the telomerase reverse transcriptase gene in Oncogene. Ornish D et al. found increased telomerase activity and comprehensive changes in a pilot study in Lancet Oncol. Matsubara Y et al. investigated the effect of functional polymorphism of ERT on telomere length of normal leukocytes in Biochem Biophys Res Commun. Mushiroda T et al. identified an association of a common variant in TERT with susceptibility to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in J Med Genet. Lancaster JM et al. discussed the genetic link between BRCA1 and BRCA2 and breast and ovarian cancer in Medscape Womens Health. The Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults provided an executive summary of the Third Report of the National Education Program (NCEP) on detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults (Adult Treatment Panel III) in J Am Med Assoc. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, and McHugh PR developed the Mini-Mental State as a practical tool. Cawthon RM described telomere measurement by quantitative PCR in Nucleic Acids Res. Vijg J and Suh Y discussed aging and longevity in Molecular Diagnostics, edited by Patrinos GP and Ansorge W (Amsterdam). Stephens M and Donnelly P compared Bayesian methods for reconstruction from population genotype data in Am J Hum Genet. De Lange T researched shelterin, the protein complex that shapes and safeguards human telomeres, in Genes Dev. Wong JM and Collins K explored telomere maintenance and disease in Lancet. Campisi J and d'Adda di Fagagna F investigated cellular senescence: when bad things happen to good cells in Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. Finch CE discussed the biology of aging (Academic Press, Burlington, MA). Njajou OT et al. found that telomere length is paternally inherited and associated with parental lifespan in Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. Benetos A et al. found that telomere length is an indicator of biological aging, with gender effects and relation to pulse pressure and pulse wave velocity in Hypertension. Lindsey J et al. observed loss of telomeric repeats with age in humans in Mutat Res. Nawrot TS et al. found a possible link between telomere length and the X chromosome in Lancet. Slagboom PE et al. studied the genetic determination of telomere size in humans in a twin study of three age groups in Am J Hum Genet. Aviv A discussed telomeres and human somatic fitness in J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. Von Zglinicki T and Martin-Ruiz CM explored telomeres as biomarkers for aging and age-related diseases in Curr Mol Med. Cawthon RM et al. found an association between telomere length in blood and mortality in people aged 60 years or older in Lancet. Bischoff C et