database. The dual-specific A kinase-anchoring protein 2 (D-AKAP2) gene has a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) resulting in an amino acid change from Ile to Val in the A-kinase-binding domain. This SNP showed the strongest correlation with age in a screen of healthy European-American individuals. An independent sample analysis indicated that the Val variant was associated with a statistically significant decrease in the length of the electrocardiogram PR interval. An in vitro binding assay revealed that the Ile variant bound 3-fold weaker to the protein kinase A (PKA)-RI isoform than the Val variant. This decreased affinity resulted in alterations in the subcellular distribution of recombinantly expressed PKA-RI isoform. Our study suggests that alterations in PKA-RI subcellular localization caused by variation in D-AKAP2 may have a negative health prognosis in the aging population, which may be related to cardiac dysfunction. Age-stratified samples appear to be useful for screening SNPs to identify functional gene variants that have an impact on health.

The focus of human genetics has shifted towards identifying genes involved in common diseases such as cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and Alzheimer's disease. To test the assumption that frequencies of disease susceptibility alleles are expected to decrease in healthy elderly individuals due to their contribution to disease morbidity and mortality, we compared allele frequencies of 6,500 SNPs located in 5,000 genes between DNA pools of age-stratified healthy European-American individuals. We define variants with decreased frequency due to morbidity and mortality as disease susceptibility alleles. Our approach is distinct from previous approaches because our samples are primarily selected as being healthy and not by age.

Efforts to identify susceptibility genes for common diseases have critical limitations such as small numbers of genes and high expenses. Linkage analyses have been proven expensive and ineffective at identifying disease susceptibility genes. However, shared public and private efforts to identify and validate SNPs genome-wide and improvements in SNP measurement technologies have enhanced the feasibility of genome-wide association studies.

DNA was extracted from blood samples of healthy individuals ascertained through blood donation centers. Age-, gender-, and ethnicity-specific pools were generated by pooling equimolar amounts of each DNA sample. All PCR and MassEXTEND reactions were conducted using standard conditions, and both alleles were analyzed to calculate allele frequencies.

Orthologous sequences were identified with PSI-BLAST against the NCBI database. The study suggests that age-stratified samples are useful for screening SNPs to identify functional gene variants that have an impact on health.and old groups. 

We used a non-redundant database and a BLOSUM62 weight matrix to identify orthologues of mouse D-AKAP2 (SwissProt O88845) from various species, including Homo sapiens (SwissProt O43572), Sus scrofa (SwissProt P57770), Drosophila melanogaster (SW:Q9V3I3), and Caenorhabditis elegans (SwissProt Q10955). Partial sequences from Anopheles gambiae (GenBank accession no. AJ281189) and Gallus gallus (GenBank accession no. AJ398916) were obtained from GenBank EST sequences. 

Allele frequencies were estimated based on independent mass spectrometry measurements of four analyte aliquots derived from a single PCR reaction, with females and males analyzed separately. SNPs that had P values of 0.05 among all measured SNPs were identified and validated through individual genotyping. 

Recombinant D-AKAP2 variant construction was carried out by fusing the 40 C-terminal amino acids of D-AKAP2 to the C terminus of GST and subcloning between the NdeI and BamHI sites of pRSET. The constructs were transfected into BL21 cells and expressed for 6 h at 20C. Fluorescence anisotropy was monitored using a Fluoromax-2 equipped with polarizers, with data averaged and fit to a 1:1 binding model using nonlinear regression application in GRAPHPAD PRISM version 3.00. 

D-AKAP2 codes for dual-specific A-kinase anchor protein 2, which is part of a family of scaffold proteins known as A-kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs). AKAPs bind the regulatory subunit of cAMP-dependent PKA, and target the kinase to various intracellular locations. PKA is a broad specificity kinase and phosphorylates numerous proteins that function in many essential cellular processes such as metabolism, gene transcription, cell division, and neuronal transmission. 

We identified 50 markers of the 6,500 tested markers that show a reproducibly significant allele frequency change between the two age groups in at least one gender. The SNP that demonstrated the strongest association with age in both genders is located within the D-AKAP2 gene. We pursued a strategy that utilizes estimates of allele frequencies in DNA pools to screen large numbers of SNPs in a quick and affordable manner. 

An A 3 G polymorphism in the 3 UTR of D-AKAP2 showed a significant decrease of 8% (P 0.01) of the G allele in the older sample of both genders. The marker was individually genotyped and the frequency differences between young and old individuals calculated from the genotypes were very similar to the pool results. There was a slight skewing of frequencies in the pools likely resulting from uneven PCR amplification of the two alleles. This led to an underestimation of the G allele frequency in all pools but did not impact the significance of the differences between young and old groups.text, there are several errors that need to be corrected. Here is the processed text:

To identify common polymorphisms in the D-AKAP2 gene, we sequenced the 15 exons and 100,200 bp of the flanking sequence (Fig. 4, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS website, www.pnas.org). The analysis of 36 chromosomes revealed only two additional polymorphisms: an A to G SNP in intron 10, six nucleotides downstream from exon 10 (In10), and an A to G SNP in exon 14, leading to an amino acid substitution Ile to Val at position 646 (I646V). Individual genotyping of the European-American samples showed that the intron 10 SNP exhibits no morbidity-association. The I646V polymorphism, however, was found to be significantly different between young and old in both male (P = 0.03) and female (P = 0.009) groups (Table 3). There was no significant difference between young males and females and between old males and females. We applied the Bayesian coalescent theory-based method (20) to construct haplotypes at these three tightly linked sites for each subject. The estimates of the disequilibrium (D) between the 3 UTR and the I646V and In10 SNPs were 0.991 and 0.255 (r2 = 0.55 and 0.03), respectively. The distance (eave) between the markers in strong disequilibrium, 3 UTR and I646V, which both showed association, is 4 kb, whereas the intron 10 SNP is located 23 kb upstream of I646V (Fig. 4).

Table 3 shows a comparison of allele frequencies between young and old groups for each SNP with frequencies for the G allele. At the 3 UTR and the I646V variable sites, GG homozygotes were reduced and AA homozygotes increased in the older sample of both genders. This further supports the hypothesis that the G allele, which determines the Val allele at I646V, is associated with a negative health impact.

The variable position resulting from the SNP (I646V) is located in the AKB domain of D-AKAP2. This domain is the docking site for PKA (13) and is highly conserved among species (Fig. 2a). Similar to other AKAPs, the AKB domain is predicted to form an amphipathic helix with hydrophobic amino acids on one face of the helix (21, 22). The length of the hydrophobic side chains on the hydrophobic face of the helix can alter PKA binding specificity (23, 24). The AKB domain of D-AKAP2 interacts with RI and RII isoforms of PKA and determines the extent of subcellular localization of PKA. The presence of two potential RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) motifs suggests the involvement of D-AKAP2 in G protein-mediated signal transduction (13, 18, 25). A putative PDZ-binding motif (TKL) at the C terminus is a protein-protein recognition module that plays a central role in organizing diverse cell signaling assemblies (26). The R249H variant is located in a spacer separating two halves of a potential RGS domain. The conservation of this position and surrounding sequence is very low compared with the AKB domain. Because there is no interaction partner identified for this spacer, the potential functional effect of R249H was not analyzed further.

To determine whether the D-AKAP2 Ile Val variation resulted in an alteration in its binding properties to PKA, the binding of each variant to the regulatory subunits of PKA was investigated. Binding of each AKB domain variant to PKA was first examined by using an in vitro pull-down assay, in which the 40 C-terminal residues of D-AKAP2 containing the AKB were fused to glutathione S-transferase (GST) (Fig. 2b). The Ile Val substitution resulted in an isoform-specific difference in PKA binding. The RI isoform of PKA bound with a significantly higher affinity to the Val variant (Fig. 2b). The higher affinity was seen for both the mouse and the human AKB domains. The residue differences between mouse and human downstream of the Ile Val position had no effect on the binding properties. Moreover, there was no difference in binding of the variants to the RII isoform (Fig. 2b).

To assess the magnitude of the affinity difference, binding of both variants to the R isoforms was analyzed in a quantitative assay. Peptides of each AKB variant were synthesized and fluorescently labeled. Binding of these peptides to theIn experiments, RI displayed differential binding to the AKB variants. The Val variant had a nearly three-fold increase in binding affinity when compared with the Ile variant. The interaction was specific because no binding was observed to a deletion construct of RI that lacked the AKAP ARONETa binding domain (delta191RI). How the RI-specific binding differences of the D-AKAP2 variants translate into a health risk is likely to be complex. Compartmentalization by AKAPs is known to play an important role in the specificity and regulation of cAMP-mediated signaling of PKA (19). The cellular evidence presented here by using the mitochondrial-targeted form of D-AKAP2 suggests that the Ile variant has a reduced ability to compartmentalize RI PKA. Therefore, decreased compartmentalization of type I PKA may have an advantageous health effect. This effect could be direct by decreasing PKA signaling through D-AKAP2-Ile anchored PKA or indirect by redistributing the local pools of RI in cells that have an important impact on health.

To determine whether the observed in vitro affinity differences resulted in a difference in cellular compartmentalization, we examined the association of the AKB variants and the PKA regulatory subunits in cells. In this assay, the AKB domains of D-AKAP2 from mouse (Val) and human (Ile) were fused to the mitochondrial anchoring domain of D-AKAP1, respectively, and tethered to the outer mitochondrial membrane (27, 28). The binding of the AKB domain to the PKA regulatory subunits was detected as the cotransfected PKA regulatory domains colocalized to the mitochondria. As expected, both the Val and Ile AKB variants can target RII to the mitochondria effectively, in accordance with their similar affinity in vitro (Fig. 3h and k). However, for RI, there was a difference in colocalization between the variants. The Val variant effectively targeted RI to the mitochondria (Fig. 3b). The Ile variant, however, was unable to target RI, which was evenly diffused in the cytosol (Fig. 3e) demonstrating that the Ile variant of D-AKAP2 has an impaired ability to sequester RI.

Increasing evidence suggests that the RI and RII isoforms of PKA have distinct functions (30). The RI isoform has been implicated in a variety of biological functions such as cell proliferation (31), tumor suppression (32, 33), immune regulation (34), and embryonic development (35, 36). In addition, the RI isoform plays a significant role in maintaining cAMP regulation of PKA as evidenced by the embryonic lethality of mice deficient in the gene (35). Interestingly, these mice have defects in cardiac morphogenesis.

The correlation of the I646V variant with the EKG PR interval indicates that this polymorphism might be a predisposing factor for a cardiac phenotype. Individuals homozygous for the Val variant exhibit shorter atrium depolarization intervals (PR) than individuals homozygous for Ile. This phenotypic correlation combined with literature reports supporting a role for AKAP-mediated PKA signaling in normal cardiac function suggests plausible hints of how the Val variant may lead to pathogenesis.

We have identified SNPs in the D-AKAP2 gene that are associated with morbidity by using a genome-wide association study from an age-stratified healthy population and 6,500 gene-based SNPs. The combined genetic and biochemical evidence points to the Ile-Val variant as the functional polymorphism. PKA phosphorylates numerous substrates in response to adrenergic stimulation that influence the contractility of cardiac myocytes (37). Some of these substrates include the L-type Ca2+ channel, the ryanodine receptor, and phospholamban of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. AKAP-mediated targeting of PKA in cardiac myocytes has also been directly implicated in regulating cell contractility (38). Three AKAPs have been shown to interact with PKA in cardiac myocytes; muscle-selective AKAP (mAKAP), AKAP18 and Yotiao. mAKAP targets PKA to the perinuclear region of differentiated myocytes, coordinating both PKA and phosphodiesterase activity in a single complex (39). AKAP18 couples PKA to L-type Ca2+ channels, which enhances Ca2+ influx through the channel after adrenergic stimulation (40). Yotiao, an AKAP associated with N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors (41), has been shown to interact with the KCNQ1-KCNE1 K+ channel subunits in human hearts (42). Mutations in this channel associated with hereditary long QT syndrome abolish Yotiao interactions with the channel and attenuN. Marx, S. O., Reiken, S., Gaburjakova, M., Richardson, J. A., Marks, A. R. & Olsen, E. N. (Circ. Res.), Robinson, M.L., Wallert, M.A., Reinitz, C.A. & Shabb, J.B. (Arch. Biochem. Biophys.), Reinitz, C.A., Bianco, R.A. & Shabb, J.B. (Arch. Biochem. Biophys.), Risch, N. & Merikangas, K. (Science), Puca, A.A., Daly, M.J., Brewster, S.J., Matise, T.C., Barrett, J., Shea-Drinkwater, M., Kang, S., Joyce,E., Nicoli,J., Benson,E., Kunkel,L.M.&Perls,T.(Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA), Haviland,M.B.,Lussier-Cacan,S.,Davignon,J.&Sing,C.F.(Am.J.Med.Genet.), Schachter,F.,Faure-Delanef,L.,Guenot,F.,Rouger,H.,Froguel,P.,Lesueur-Ginot,L.&Cohen,D.(Nat.Genet.), Andrew,T.,Hart,D.J.,Snieder,H.,Dange,M.,Spector,T.D.&Maregor,A.J.(Twin Res.), Buetow,K.H.,Edmonson,M.,MacDonald,R.,Clifford,R.,Yip,P.,Kelley,J.,
Little,D.P.,
Strausberg,R.,
Koester,H.,
Cantor,C.R.&Braun,A.(Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA), Bansal,A.,
van den Boom,D.,
Kammerer,S.,
Honisch,C.,
Adam,G.,
Cantor,C.R.,
Kleyn,P.&Braun,A.(Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA), Mohlke,K.L.,Erdos,M.R.,Scott,L.J.,Fingerlin,T.E.,Jackson,A.U.,Silander,K.,Hollstein,P.,Boehnke,M.&Collins,F.S.(Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA), Abecasis,G.R.,Cardon,L.R.&Cookson,W.O.(Am.J.Hum.Genet.), Schaffer,A.A.,Aravind,L.,Madden,T.L.,
Shavirin,S.,
Spouge,J.L.,
Wolf,Y.I.,
Koonin,E.V.&Altschul,S.F.(Nucleic Acids Res.), Henikoff,S.&Henikoff,J.G.(Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA), Huang,L.J.,Durick,K.,Weiner,J.A.,Chun,J.&Taylor,S.S.(Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA), Huang,L.J.,
Wang,L.,
Ma,Y.,
Durick,K.,
Perkins,G.,
Deerinck,T.J.,
Ellisman,M.H.&Taylor,S.S.(J.Cell Biol.), Sham,P.,
Bader,J.S.,
Craig,I.,
O'Donovan,M.&Owen,M.(Nat.Rev.Genet.), Nei,M.(Am.Nat.), Saitou,N.&Nei,M.(Mol.Biol.Evol.), Wang,L., Sunahara,R.K.,Krumins,A.,Perkins,G.,Crochiere,M.L.,Mackey,M.,Bell,S.,Ellisman,M.H.&Taylor,S.S. (Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.USA), Edwards,A.S.&Scott,J.D. (Curr.Opin.Cell Biol.), Stephens,M.,Smith,N.J.&Donnelly,P. (Am.J.Hum.Genet.), Carr,D.W.,Hausken,Z.E.,Fraser,I.D.,Stofko-Hahn,R.E.&Scott,J.D. (J.Biol.Chem.).