A genome-wide scan for linkage to human exceptional longevity identifies a locus on chromosome 4. Annibale A. Puca*, Mark J. Daly, Stephanie J. Brewster, Tara C. Matise, Jeffrey Barrett, Maureen Sammy Kang, Erin Joyce, Julie Nicoli*, Erica Benson, Louis M. Kunkel*, and Thomas Perls| *Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Genetics Division, Children's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215; Center for Genome Research at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02214; Department of Genetics, Nelson Biological Laboratories, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854; Centagenetix, Boston, MA 02119; and Gerontology Division and Biometrics Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Division on Aging, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215.

Methods: Substantial evidence supports the familial aggregation of exceptional longevity. The existence of rare families demonstrating clustering for this phenotype suggests that a genetic etiology may be an important component. Previous attempts at localizing loci predisposing for exceptional longevity have been limited to association studies of candidate gene polymorphisms. In this study, a genome-wide scan for such predisposing loci was conducted by using 308 individuals belonging to 137 sibships demonstrating exceptional longevity. By using nonparametric analysis, significant evidence for linkage was noted for chromosome 4 at D4S1564 with a MLS of 3.65 (P = 0.044). The analysis was corroborated by a parametric analysis (P = 0.052). These linkage results indicate the likelihood that there exists a gene or genes that exert a substantial influence on the ability to achieve exceptional old age. Identification of the genes in humans that allow certain individuals to live to extreme old age should lead to insights on cellular pathways that are important to the aging process.

Subjects: Written informed consent was obtained from all participants and their legal proxies in accordance with the requirements of the Institutional Review Boards of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Children's Hospital of Boston. Proof of birth, in the form of a birth certificate, was obtained from 90% of subjects. Other acceptable proof was obtained from the remaining subjects; otherwise, a potential subject was not enrolled (7). The collection of centenarians or near-centenarians and their siblings began in 1997, well in advance of the specific planning for a genome scan analysis.

A minimum age of 98 years for at least one member of the sibship (the proband) was chosen because preliminary sibship recruitment efforts indicated that lowering the age from 100 to 98 was necessary to enroll enough sibships for a potential genetic study. All siblings aged 90 years and older were recruited. Before the conduct of the genome scan and subsequent analysis, it was decided that all sibships with a proband, at least one male sibling aged 91 years old or older, and/or a female sibling aged 95 years old or older would constitute the sample set to be analyzed. These sibling ages were chosen because they represented the 5% oldest individuals in the birth cohort based on U.S. and Canadian life tables. This selection resulted in 143 sibships and 322 individuals predominantly of European descent.

Centenarians have lived 20 years longer than the average life expectancy of those in their birth cohort who survived beyond the age of 65 years (1). For most centenarians, the majority of those additional years are spent in good health (2). We hypothesize that, relative to the general population, centenarians have a history of aging slowly, and they either markedly delay or escape age-associated diseases such as cardiovascular disease, stroke, diabetes, cancer, and Alzheimer's disease (3). While studying the phenotypic characteristics of centenarians in an attempt to discern characteristics that might explain this disease resistance and survival advantage, we frequently encountered subjects who reported similarly long-lived siblings. We therefore suspected that these siblings had genetic and environmental factors in common that conferred an unexpected survival advantage. Comparing the longevity of siblings of centenarians and siblings of a control group who were from a similar birth cohort, the siblings of the centenarians had a substantially greater chance of surviving to extreme old age compared with the siblings of the controls. This relative risk of survival steadily increased with age for siblings of the centenarians to the point that the siblings had a 4-fold greater probability of survival to age 91 (4). Moreover, in the course of recruiting subjects, we discovered four families with many exceptionally old individuals that also contributed to our suspicion that there is a significant genetic component to the ability to achieve exceptional old age (5). Finally, the dramatic degree of demographic selection that occurs in the nonagenarian years might indicate that few polymorphisms genes are significantly responsible for the survival of relatively few individuals achievingThe text appears to be a scientific report on a study of human longevity. Here is the processed text:

Database frequencies from the d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (Paris) were analyzed. In regions with suggestive linkage, a higher-density map was used to identify genotypes implying double recombinants, and raw data were reexamined or retyped. The genome screen analyzed 308 individuals from 137 families and identified a highly suggestive region on chromosome 4 between D4S1572 and D4S406 (MLS 2.67). Fine mapping at an average of 1 marker every 3 cM in a 20-cM region around this peak resulted in an increased MLS (3.65) at marker D4S1564 (see Table 1). To estimate the significance of the observed linkage to chromosome 4, simulations were designed under the hypothesis of no linkage that matched the family structure and marker heterozygosity of the study. One thousand genome scans were simulated with a genome-wide map density of 1 marker every 3 cM, and in only 44 of those scans was the observed MLS of 3.65 exceeded (P = 0.044).

Previous studies suggest that parametric linkage analyses using both dominant and recessive inheritance models may be more powerful than nonparametric studies in some cases for detecting genes contributing to complex traits. An obvious consequence of studying exceptional longevity is that neither unaffected family members nor parents can be appropriately summarized and corrected by multiplying the more significant associated P value by two, thus producing a final parametric P value of 0.052. These analyses provide significant evidence for heterogeneity, with odds in favor of heterogeneity of 1,800:1. For this dataset and trait, parametric and nonparametric analyses corroborate each other and demonstrate that the results are robust to different sets of assumptions.

Table 1 shows the nonparametric MLS and parametric hlod scores within the exceptional longevity susceptibility locus relative to markers in the chromosome 4 region. A dropoff of 1.5 in the MLS score on either side of the peak defines the area in which we can be 95% confident the gene resides. A dropoff in the MLS of 2 on either side of the peak is observed in a region encompassed by D4S414 and D4S1611. The MLS scores in this and the hlod scores under the dominant model are shown.

A locus in the D4S1564 region could explain 1.65-fold of that risk, and thus a more modest common polymorphism might be inferred. A number of genetic mechanisms are likely to be at play in effecting such an influence. A relative lack of polymorphisms predisposing to age-associated diseases appears to be one prerequisite to achieving exceptional old age. The marked decreased frequency of the apolipoprotein (apo)E-4 allele among centenarians exemplifies such a mechanism. Another prerequisite may be some degree of genetic control over how fast a person ages and the consequent impact on susceptibility to a myriad of diseases normally associated with aging.

Alternatives to this linkage study are case-control studies performed on a priori-selected candidate genes hypothesized to affect fundamental mechanisms of aging. The drawbacks of such studies include the improbability of picking the right gene to study among the myriad of known and unknown genes affecting the process of interest. The linkage study described here improves the efficiency of such association studies by defining a region likely to contain polymorphism(s) with significant influence on life span.

Additional association studies with these families and replication of these results with an independent data set should facilitate the positional cloning of a gene that influences the ability to age well and achieve exceptional longevity. Identification of genes in humans that allow certain individuals to live to extreme old age should lead to insights on cellular pathways that are important to the aging process.

The finely mapped region of chromosome 4 provided the strongest results, with a maximum heterogeneity logarithm of odds (hlod) of 3.3 under the dominant model (with 57% of families linked) and a maximum hlod of 2.9 under the recessive model (with 45% of families linked), both occurring at marker D4S1564. Empiric P values were determined by genome-wide simulations. One thousand unlinked replicates were generated to match the actual study. These replicates were analyzed exactly as the original dataset. Of 1,000 replicates, 26 had a lod score ≥3.3 under the dominant model (P = 0.026), and 77 had a lod score ≥2.9 under the recessive model (P = 0.077). Because two inheritance models were evaluated, these parametric results are appropriately summarized and corrected by multiplying the more significant associated P value by two, thus producing a final parametric P value of 0.052.

The authors thank DrI'm sorry, but there is no text enclosed in ``` ``` to be proofread and improved. Please provide the text you would like me to process.