Further Support for the Uncoupling-to-Survive Theory: The Genetic Variation of Human UCP Genes is Associated with Longevity

Giuseppina Rose, Paolina Crocco, Francesco De Rango, Alberto Montesanto, Giuseppe Passarino*

Department of Cell Biology, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy

Abstract

In humans, Uncoupling Proteins (UCPs) are a group of five mitochondrial inner membrane transporters with variable tissue expression, which function as regulators of energy homeostasis and antioxidants. These proteins uncouple respiration from ATP production, allowing stored energy to be released as heat. Data from experimental models have previously suggested that UCPs may play an important role in aging rate and lifespan. We analyzed the genetic variability of human UCPs in cohorts of subjects ranging between 64 and 105 years of age (for a total of 598 subjects) to determine whether specific UCP variability affects human longevity. Indeed, we found that the genetic variability of UCP2, UCP3 and UCP4 affects the individual's chances of surviving up to a very old age. This confirms the importance of energy storage, energy use and modulation of ROS production in the aging process. In addition, given the different localization of these UCPs (UCP2 is expressed in various tissues including brain, heart and adipose tissue while UCP3 is expressed in muscles and Brown Adipose Tissue and UCP4 is expressed in neuronal cells), our results suggest that the uncoupling process plays an important role in modulating aging especially in muscular and nervous tissues, which are indeed very responsive to metabolic alterations and are very important in estimating health status and survival in the elderly.

Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

* E-mail: g.passarino@unical.it

Introduction

The uncoupling activity of UCPs has also been linked to the regulation of other more specific metabolic functions [15,16] such as fatty acid oxidation [17], glucose-stimulated insulin secretion [18], whole-body energy balance [19], and apoptosis [20]. Human aging is characterized by a gradual reduction in the ability to coordinate cellular energy expenditure and storage (crucial to maintaining energy homeostasis), and by a gradual decrease in the ability to mount a successful stress response [21,22]. These physiological changes are typically associated with changes in body composition (i.e., an increase in fat mass and the decline in fat-free mass) and with a chronic state of oxidative stress with important consequences on health status [23-25]. Mitochondrial function is crucial in these processes, as mitochondria are the main cellular sites controlling energy metabolism and the redox state. Thus, by promoting fatty acid oxidation, and by reducing ATP and ROS production, the induction of mitochondrial uncoupling through UCPs may also be a critical pathway in the modulation of the rate of aging and lifespan [26-28]. This idea, first proposed by M. D. Brand [26] and termed uncoupling-to-survival, is now supported by several experimental evidences (for reviews see: [27,29,30]). Of interest, targeted expression of exogenous UCP extends lifespan of adult flies [31,32], while mice with higher metabolism live longer and have higher uncoupling activity [33]. Transgenic and knockout mice for Ucp genes show alterations in lifespan [34,35]. Interestingly, it has also been shown that in vivo uncoupling mimics metabolic and lifespan effects of calorie restriction (CR) [36]. Consistently, mice subjected to CR show an increased expression of Ucp2 and Ucp3 [37,38].

Table 1. Description and localization of selected SNPs in the UCP genes.

Gene Function symbol dbSNP ID Physical location annotation 

UCP2 rs660339 C/T exon 4 Ala55Val 
rs659366 G/A 5' -proximal region 2866 G/A 
UCP3 rs15763 C/T 3'UTR 
rs1800849 C/T 5' -proximal region 255 C/T 
UCP4 rs9472817 C/G intron 8 
rs10498769 C/G 3'UTR 
UCP5 rs2235800 A/T intron 7 
rs5975178 C/T 5' -proximal region 

Given the tissue-specific expression of UCP genes, it seems likely that they may affect the senescence of different tissues with important effects on the overall aging process and consequently on lifespan. Thus, the goal of the present study was to assess both the primary effects of single loci and gene-gene interactions to test the hypothesis that other UCP genes may contribute to survival at a very old age either independently and/or through complex genotype-phenotype associations in case-control studiesCovariates [49]: This test was based on the score test and has been implemented in the R package RobustSNP. In the present study, the robust association test proposed by So and Sham was applied to estimate the association between the variability in the UCP genes and the probability of reaching advanced ages. In each test, we included sex and Body Mass Index (BMI) as covariates. The analyses were carried out by dividing the sample into two specific age classes obtained according to the survival function of the Italian population from 1890 onwards [44]. The two thresholds of longevity used to define these age classes were 88 years for men and 91 years for women.

SNPs selection: Polymorphisms within the UCP genes were selected from literature data, and using information from online databases such as NCBI dbSNP and HapMap. SNP selection was based on allele frequency, position, and functional effects. For each gene, the selected SNPs are reported in Table 1.

From the z-statistics of these models, we observed that carriers of the T allele at rs660339 and rs1800849 (dominant models) significantly influenced the probability of being part of the oldest group (positive scores). For the recessive models, homozygous subjects for the T allele at rs15763 variation also increased the probability of being part of the oldest group, while this probability was significantly decreased (negative score) for homozygous subjects with the T allele at rs9472817.

Haplotypic analysis: Pairwise measures of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between the analyzed loci were calculated with Haploview 4.2 [50]. The amount of LD was quantified by Lewontin's coefficient (D). In order to model the effect of haplotypes on the probability to attain longevity, we used the haplo.stats package of R. It implements a haplotype-based association analysis within the generalized linear model (GLM) framework that allows for ambiguous haplotypes. The haplo.score function of this package has been used to obtain the GLM-based score statistics for testing global and individual haplotype effects on the probability to attain longevity [51]. Permutation-based p-values were used to evaluate the significance of the scores obtained (10,000 permutations). In this model, the effect of different haplotypes was assessed assuming a dominant model after adjusting for sex and BMI.

By using the MB-MDR approach, we did not find any significant interaction effect among the analyzed polymorphisms (data not shown). Subsequently, using the aforementioned GLM-based algorithm, we evaluated the effect of the UCP haplotypes on the probability to attain longevity. LD analysis showed that among the four SNPs in the UCP2-UCP3 gene region rs660339, rs659366 and rs15763 were in moderate LD (see Fig. 1), while rs1800849 was in LD with rs15763 (D = 0.83), but it was virtually unlinked with others (D < 0.30). Finally, we found weak LD between rs9472817 and rs10498769 in the UCP4 gene (D = 0.47), and between rs2235800 and rs5975178 in the UCP5 gene (D = 0.44). Based on these LD patterns, and using a D cutoff equal to 0.6, haplotypes were reconstructed at the UCP2-UCP3 and UCP3 loci.

Interaction analysis: In order to explore the interaction effects between analyzed polymorphisms on the probability of being part of the very old age group, the Model-Based Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction (MB-MDR) method was applied [52]. In this model, only all possible second-order interactions, after adjusting for main effects sex and BMI, were analyzed.

As shown in Table 4, the analysis of the UCP2-UCP3 haplotypes revealed that the CAC haplotype, consisting of the minor allele for rs660339, major allele for rs659366, and minor allele rs15763, was associated with a decreased probability of attaining longevity (P= 0.003), while the TGT haplotype (opposite combination of alleles) acted in a reverse fashion by increasing this probability (p =0.046). However, the strength of these associations was influenced by the allelic status at rs659366 of the relevant haplotype. Indeed, the CGC and TAT haplotypes, when compared to the above, differ only for rs659366 and did not show any effect. For the UCP3 haplotypes involving rs15763 and rs1800849, we found that carriers of the CC haplotype have a decreased probability of achieving longevity (P<0.001). Conversely, asfrom mitochondria extends lifespan in various organisms [61]. The Val/Val genotype has been associated with greater weight loss and higher BMI [62], although conflicting results have been reported in other studies [63-66]. Our study shows that the UCP2 polymorphism contributes to extending lifespan, likely due to its systemic effects on global energy metabolism and redox state. However, UCP2 also exhibits tissue-specific regulation, suggesting tissue-specific physiological effects. Evidence suggests that UCP2 functions as a regulator of oxidative stress in the brain, liver, and other tissues. The ability of UCP2 to attenuate steady-state levels of ROS strongly suggests an essential role in lifespan extension, as damage by free radicals is the underlying cause of aging. Andrews proposed that UCP2 promotes longevity by shifting a cell towards fatty acid fuel utilization, thus pointing to a major role of UCP2 in modulating metabolism [75]. This hypothesis is somewhat supported by Barbieri and colleagues' positive effect of the rs659366T-rs15763T haplotype [76]. 

Skeletal muscle, where UCP3 is mainly expressed, contributes considerably to the basal metabolic rate [80]. Carriers of the TT genotype (rs15763) and carriers of the -55 T allele (rs180084) were significantly over-represented among long-lived subjects. The -55 T allele has been associated with a significantly increased gene expression and has been shown to positively modulate the resting metabolic rate of skeletal muscle [81,82]. The over-expression of UCP3 in muscle cells has been shown to be associated with decreased production of ROS as well as with facilitating fatty acid oxidation [17,83]. The physiological consequence of an increased UCP3 activity in skeletal muscle might be to slow down the age-related decline of muscle performance as a result of decreased ROS production, an increased protection of mitochondria from lipid peroxidation, and better metabolic efficiency [28,83]. 

UCP4 and UCP5, together with UCP2, are known as neuronal UCPs due to their widespread distribution in the brain [6]. Andrews and co-workers observed that neuronal uncoupling activity leads to decreased ROS levels, a decreased Ca2+ voltage-dependent influx, and increased local temperature in the neuronal microenvironment [88]. Only the UCP4 rs9472817-GG genotype negatively impacts on the probability to attain longevity. UCP4 activity can induce an adaptive shift in energy metabolism from mitochondrial respiration to glycolysis that helps sustain neurons under conditions of metabolic and oxidative stress [89,90]. Therefore, by decreasing free radical production and stabilizing cellular calcium homeostasis, UCPs expressed in neurons may positively influence neuronal function (synaptic transmission and plasticity) and retard the cellular deterioration associated with aged-related neurological disorders. 

In conclusion, our study found that the genetic variability of UCP genes affects human longevity. This finding supports the Uncoupling-to-survive hypothesis, which suggests that energy storage and expenditure have a key role in survival at old age. Although this hypothesis was initially based on the possible effects of UCPs on oxidative stress, recent data have emphasized the impact of UCP variations on metabolic efficiency. It is likely that the impact of UCPs gene variation on longevity is due to the complexity of these functions rather than the sole effect of oxidative stress. Further analyses will be necessary to understand the specific role of the uncoupling process in different tissues and its correlation with differing metabolism and nutrients.The text is a list of references related to the study of uncoupling proteins and their potential role in energy metabolism, aging, and disease. It contains multiple citations to scientific articles that explore the effects of uncoupling protein activity on insulin signaling, lifespan, and metabolic rate in various animal models. The text also includes references to studies investigating the association between uncoupling protein gene polymorphisms and obesity, diabetes, and other health conditions in humans. The goal of the proofreading task is to correct any spelling errors, grammatical mistakes, or formatting issues while preserving the original meaning and context of the text.

Processed Text:
The activity in Drosophila insulin-producing neurons attenuates insulin signaling and extends lifespan. Ageing: Speakman JR, Talbot DA, Selman C, Snart S, Manser JS et al. (2004) Uncoupled and surviving: individual mice with high metabolism have greater mitochondrial uncoupling and live longer. Ageing Cell: Conti B, Sanchez-Alavez M, Winsky-Sommerer R, Morale MC, Lucero J et al. (2006) Transgenic mice with a reduced core body temperature have an increased lifespan. Science: Andrews ZB, Horvath TL (2009) Uncoupling protein-2 regulates lifespan in mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab (2011): Caldeira da Silva CC, Cerqueira FM, Barbosa LF, Medeiros MH, Kowaltowski AJ (2008) Mild mitochondrial uncoupling in mice affects energy metabolism, redox balance and longevity. Ageing Cell: Bevilacqua L, Ramsey JJ, Hagopian K, Weindruch R, Harper ME (2005) Long-term caloric restriction increases UCP content but decreases proton leak and reactive oxygen species production in rat skeletal muscle mitochondria. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab (2005): McDonald RB, Walker KM, Warman DB, Griffey SM, Warden CH et al. (1998) Characterization of survival and phenotype throughout the lifespan in UCP2/UCP3 genetically altered mice. Exp Gerontol: Li Y, Maedler K, Shu L, Haataja L (2008) UCP-2 and UCP-3 proteins are differentially regulated in pancreatic beta-cells. PLoS One: e Salopuro T, Pulkkinen L, Lindstrom J, Kolehmainen M, Tolppanen AM et al. (2009) Variation in the UCP2 and UCP3 genes associates with abdominal obesity and serum lipids: the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study. BMC Med Genet: Jia JJ, Zhang X, Ge CR, Jois M (2009) The polymorphisms of UCP2 and UCP3 genes associated with fat metabolism, obesity and diabetes. Obes Rev: Crocco P, Montesanto A, Passarino G, Rose G (2011) A common polymorphism in the UCP3 promoter influences hand grip strength in elderly people. Biogerontology (2011): Rose G, Crocco P, DAquila P, Montesanto A, Bellizzi D et al. (2011) Two variants located in the upstream enhancer region of human UCP3 gene affect gene expression and are correlated with human longevity. Exp Gerontol [Epub ahead of print]. Passarino G, Montesanto A, Dato S, Giordano S, Domma F et al. (2006) Sex and age specificity of susceptibility genes modulating survival at old age. Hum Hered: Wigginton JE, Cutler DJ, Abecasis GR (2005) A note on exact tests of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Am J Hum Genet: Freidlin B, Zheng G, Li Z, Gastwirth JL (2002) Trend tests for case-control studies of genetic markers: power, sample size and robustness. Hum Hered: Zang Y, Fung WK (2009) Robust tests for matched case-control genetic association studies. BMC Genet: Zang Y, Fung WK, Zheng G (2010) Simple algorithms to calculate asymptotic null distribution for robust tests in case-control genetic association studies in R. Journal of Statistical Software: So HC, Sham PC (2011) Robust Association Tests Under Different Genetic Models, Allowing for Binary or Quantitative Traits and Covariates. Behav Genet: Barrett JC, Fry B, Maller J, Daly MJ (2005) Haploview: analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics: Schaid DJ, Rowland CM, Tines DE, Jacobson RM, Poland GA (2002) "Score tests for association of traits with haplotypes whenHigher insulin response to glucose.

Metabolism: Chen HH, Lee W, Wang W, Huang MT, Lee YC, et al. () polymorphism on UCP gene predicts greater weight loss in morbidly obese patients undergoing gastric banding. Obes Surg: Dalgaard LT, Andersen G, Larsen LH, Sorensen TI, Andersen T, et al. Mutational analysis of the UCP core promoter and its relationship with obesity. Obes Res: Wang H, Chu WS, Lu T, Hasstedt SJ, Kern PA, et al. () protein- polymorphisms in type 2 diabetes, obesity, and insulin resistance. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab: E Hsu YH, Niu T, Song Y, Tinker L, Kuller LH, et al. () Genetic variants in the UCP gene cluster and risk of diabetes in the Women's Initiative Observational Study. Diabetes: Lee YH, Kim W, Yu BC, Lae Park BL, Kim LH, et al. () Association of Ins/Del polymorphisms of uncoupling protein (UCP) with BMI in a population. Biochem Biophys Res Commun: Paradis E, Clavel S, Bouillaud F, Ricquier D, Richard D () protein: A novel player in neuroprotection. Trends Mol Med: Horvath TL, Diano S, Barnstable C () Mitochondrial uncoupling protein in the central nervous system: Neuromodulator and neuroprotector. Pharmacol: Cortez-Pinto H, Yang SQ, Lin HZ, Costa S, Hwang CS et al. () lipopolysaccharide induces uncoupling protein- expression in hepatocytes by tumor necrosis factor-alpha-dependent mechanism. Biochem Biophys Commun: Murray AJ, Anderson RE, Watson GC Radda GK, Clarke K. Uncoupling proteins in the human heart. Lancet: Kopecky J, Rossmeisl M, Flachs P, Brauner P, Sponarova J, et al. () metabolism of adipose tissue- physiological aspects and target in treatment. Physiol Res: Samec S, Seydoux J, Dulloo AG () skeletal muscle UCP and UCP expression in response to inhibition of free fatty acid flux through beta-oxidation. Pflugers Arch: Saleh MC, Wheeler MB, Chan CB () Uncoupling protein- : Evidence for its function as a metabolic regulator. Diabetologia: Diao J, Allister EM, Koshkin V, Lee SC, Bhattacharjee A, et al. () UCP highly expressed in pancreatic alpha-cells and influences secretion and PNAS: Andrews ZB () Uncoupling protein- and the potential link between metabolism and longevity. Curr Aging Sci: Barbieri M, Boccardi V, Esposito A, Papa M, Vestini F, et al. () VAL allele combination of IGF R, IRS , and UCP genes is associated with mortality rate in longevity. Age. DOI: /s Manini TM () Energy expenditure and aging. Ageing Res Rev: Barbieri M, Gambardella A, Paolisso G, Varricchio M () Metabolic aspects of extreme longevity. Exp Gerontol: Rizzo MR, Mari D, Barbieri M, Ragno E, Grella R et al. () Resting Metabolic Rate and Respiratory Quotient in Human Longevity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab: Rolfe DF Brown GC () Cellular energy utilization and molecular origin of standard metabolic rate in mammals. Physiol Rev: Schrauwen P, Xia J Walder K Snitker S Ravussin E () A novel polymorphism in the proximal UCP promoter region: effect on skeletal muscle UCP NA expression and obesity in male non-diabetic Pima Indians. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord; : Schrauwen P, Xia J, Bogardus C, Pratley R, Ravussin E () Skeletal muscle UCP expression is a determinant of energy expenditure in Pima Indians. Diabetes: Nabben M, Hoeks J, Briede JJ, Glatz JF, Moonen-Kornips E, et al. () The effect of UCP overexpression on mitochondrial ROS production in the skeletal muscle of young versus aged mice. FEBS Lett: Karakelides H, Nair KS () Sarcopenia of aging and its metabolic impact. Curr Top Dev Biol: Rossi P, Marzani B, Giardina S, Negro M, Marzatico F () Human skeletal muscle aging and the oxidative system: cellular events. Curr Ageing Sci: Amara CE, Shankland EG, Jubrias SA, Marcinek DJ, Kushmer