Lipoprotein Genotype and Conserved Pathway for Exceptional Longevity in Humans

Atzmon, Marielisa Rincon, Clyde B. Schechter, Alan R. Shuldiner, Richard B. Lipton, Aviv Bergman, and Nir Barzilai

Institute for Aging Research, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America, Diabetes Research and Training Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America, Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America, Department of Family and Social Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America, Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America, Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America and Department of Pathology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in Bronx.

Alteration of single genes involved in nutrient and lipoprotein metabolism increases longevity in several animal models. Because exceptional longevity in humans is familial, it is likely that polymorphisms in genes favorably influence certain phenotypes and increase the likelihood of exceptional longevity. A group of Ashkenazi Jewish centenarians (n = 213), their offspring (n = 216), and an age-matched Ashkenazi control group (n = 258) were genotyped for 66 polymorphisms in 36 candidate genes related to cardiovascular disease (CVD). These genes were tested for association with serum lipoprotein levels and particle sizes; apolipoprotein A1; B and C-3 levels; and with outcomes of hypertension; insulin resistance; and mortality. The prevalence of homozygosity for the 641C allele in the APOC3 promoter (rs2542052) was higher in centenarians (25%) and their offspring (20%) than in controls (10%) (p < 0.0001 and p < 0.001, respectively). This genotype was associated with significantly lower serum levels of APOC3 and a favorable pattern of lipoprotein levels and sizes. We found a lower prevalence of hypertension and greater insulin sensitivity in the 641C homozygotes, suggesting a protective effect against CVD and the metabolic syndrome. Finally, in a prospectively studied cohort, a significant survival advantage was demonstrated in those with the favorable 641C homozygote (p < 0.0001). Homozygosity for the APOC3 641C allele is associated with a favorable lipoprotein profile, cardiovascular health, insulin sensitivity, and longevity. Because modulation of lipoproteins is also seen in genetically altered longevity models, it may be a common pathway influencing lifespan from nematodes to humans.

Citation: Atzmon G, Rincon M, Schechter CB, Shuldiner AR, Lipton RB, et al. (2006) Lipoprotein genotype and conserved pathway for exceptional longevity in humans. PLoS Biol 4(4): e113.

Introduction

Manipulation of single genes can confer longevity in lower organisms, supporting the notion that understanding pathways for exceptional longevity may be possible in humans. Because the contribution of genetics to lifespan is estimated to be only around 20%, a way to enhance the odds of identifying genetic factors is to study those with very exceptional survival [1]. Favorable modulation of aging processes and disease susceptibility is strongly inherited in families with exceptional longevity [2][3]. Current centenarians have survived to more than double their life expectancy at birth and have often been spared from age-related diseases such as cardiovascular disease (CVD), Alzheimer's disease, diabetes mellitus (DM), and cancer [4]. Furthermore, evidence suggests that the offspring of centenarians may inherit protection against major causes of mortality because they have approximately 50% lower prevalence of these major diseases than control groups [5].

Because of the strong heritability of this survival, we began a search for gene variants that could explain extended life of centenarians and their families among the genetically homogeneous population of Ashkenazi Jews. Crucial to our approach is the knowledge that only about one in 10,000 individuals survives to 100 years old, while the average lifespan in the US is around 75 years old. Thus, enrichment in the frequency of certain genes at extreme old age probably reflects a selection effect with longevity gene variants, thereby accounting for period and cohort effects and phenotypic variation that may occur at older ages [6].

We recently reported that lipoprotein particle sizes are increased in centenarians and their offspring and suggested that this trait may increase the likelihood of attaining exceptional longevity [6]. This phenotype was also associated with approximately a three-fold increased frequency of homozygosity (valinevaline [VVassociations with exceptional longevity remained statistically significant. Analysis of the frequency trend with age (in centenarian and control groups combined) for polymorphisms in APOC3 and CETP (Figure 1) revealed a highly significant (p<0.0006; b=1.89 [95% CI, 0.23-6]) monotonically increasing frequency trend for homozygosity for the APOC3 (rs2542052) (641 C allele (CC)) and near-significance (b=3.06 [95% CI, 0.33-5.8, p=0.069]) for homozygosity for the CETP codon 405 valine allele (VV) (rs5882). The CC genotype at position 641 of APOC3 had a prevalence of 25% among the centenarians and 20% in their offspring compared to only 10% in controls (p=0.0001 and p=0.001, respectively). Five additional SNPs in APOC3 and six SNPs in CETP (Figure 2) showed no evidence of association with longevity. Conversely, the prevalence of the APOC3 AA genotype was reduced in both centenarians and their offspring compared to controls (p=0.001 both) (Figure 3A). The lipoprotein metabolism and thus the favorable alleles showing monotonic increases in allele frequencies among older age strata would also be expected to be associated with a favorable lipoprotein profile. Indeed, participants of all groups carrying the APOC3 rs2542052 CC genotype had lower serum levels of APOC3 compared to those carrying either CA or AA (CA/AA) genotype (mean [SE]: 10.1 [1.1] versus 13.2 [1.1] mg/dl, p<0.05). Given the higher prevalence of this genotype in centenarians, it is therefore not surprising that serum levels of APOC3 were lower in centenarians and their offspring than in controls (mean [SE]: 9.8 [0.6], 9.3 [0.5] versus 11.7 [0.7] mg/dl; p<0.05 and p<0.01, respectively) (Figure 3B). Linkage disequilibrium (LD) analysis of the CETP gene revealed that the single nucleotide polymorphism rs1800776 was in LD with rs1800775 just 2 bp apart (D'=0.94; r2=0.20) (Figure 2). Haplotype analysis with these two SNPs revealed that the C-A haplotype was statistically significantly more prevalent among individuals in the control group compared to centenarian probands (0.355 versus 0.278, p<0.004). LD analysis revealed LD across the neighboring apolipoprotein A4 (APOA4) and apolipoprotein C3 (APOC3) genes as previously reported by others (Figure 2) [8]. In haplotype analysis, the prevalence of the A-C haplotype (corresponding to SNP rs675 in APOA4 and rs2542052 in APOC3) was significantly higher among the centenarian probands compared to controls (0.498 versus 0.344, p<10^-8). The prevalence of the A-A haplotype of the same SNPs was significantly higher among controls compared to probands (0.483 versus 0.307, p<10^-10). Association analysis between various haplotypes of the APOC3/APOA4 and lipid profile was not significant, neither when the most prevalent haplotypes in the two groups were compared (CA versus AA) nor the haplotypes that contain the favorable APOC3 allele. The only trend for association (p<0.07) between haplotype and lipoprotein was for LDL. This suggests that the single genotype APOC3 CC is more prominent in the phenotypes. Relationships between other lipoprotein traits and APOC3 rs2542052 CC genotype are shown in Table 1. Due to the dependency of lipoprotein traits on age and their modifiability with medications, we only considered offspring (n=131) and controls (n=126) not using lipid-lowering drugs in this analysis. In females, triglycerides (TG), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL), and their ratio, as well as low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL) lipoprotein particle size were significantly more favorable among those with the rs2542052 CC genotype than among those with CA/AA genotypes. As shown in Table 1, the combined group also exhibited significant associations with lipoproteinsMice show absent or decreased APOC3 protein with reduced triglyceride (TG) levels [24], even in the presence of streptozotocin-induced diabetes [25]. However, the impact on lifespan has not been determined in these models. Of the 381 participants we have genotyped since 1998, 64 had the CC genotype. To describe the relationship between genotype and death, we plotted the Kaplan-Meier survival function estimates of study participants by APOC3 genotype (Figure 5). Survival was significantly greater among CC genotype carriers (p < 0.0007). We hypothesized that since only one out of 10,000 people in the general population has survived to 100 years, there should be potent enrichment for favorable genotypes in this unique population. The monotonic, progressive over-representation of the APOC3-641 CC genotype with increasing age, from a relatively infrequent 10% at age 60 years to 25% in individuals surviving to age 100 years is statistically robust and provides evidence that this genotype provides a selective advantage for survival to exceptional old age. Underlying population stratification could be responsible for genotypic associations detected in case-control studies, but this is much less likely in this relatively homogeneous Ashkenazi population. Furthermore, we demonstrated association of this same genotype with survival in a prospectively followed cohort. Finally, the prevalence of heterozygosity for recessive disease alleles (nearly) unique to the Ashkenazi population, e.g., breast cancer and Tay-Sachs disease, did not differ significantly between longevity cases and controls, suggesting the lack of population stratification (unpublished data).

Discussion: APOC3 is a major component of very low-density lipoproteins and chylomicron remnants; it is also a minor component of HDL [8]. In vitro, it has been shown to inhibit the activity of lipoprotein lipase, resulting in delayed TG clearance from plasma [12]. Several studies have shown that various polymorphisms of the APOC3 gene either within the promoter region, in particular the T-455C variant polymorphism in the insulin response element, or in the gene, are associated with elevated TG levels but not with significant change in APOC3 levels [13-17]. Previous studies have also associated high levels of APOC3 with macrovascular and microvascular disease and their risks. Increased APOC3 levels were a significant indicator of coronary risk in men and in patients with metabolic syndrome. In particular, those with vascular disease and metabolic syndrome had a markedly increased probability of coronary heart disease in an allele. In addition to showing statistical associations of the APOC3 genotype with exceptional longevity, we found significant associations between this genotype and several intermediate longevity-associated traits directly related to lipoproteins.

Surviving (%) 3wD a3APOC CC APOC3 CA YAA os 65T 80T 85 90 Age (years) 95T 100 105 110 HOMA Percentage of Hypertension 50 40 30 20 10 H4poc3 cc Dlapoc3 CA/AA AllMi apoc3 cc [L] APOC3 CA/AA Of the 381 participants we genotyped since 1998, 64 had the -641 CC genotype. To describe the relationship between genotype and death, we plotted the Kaplan-Meier survival function estimates of probands and controls by APOC3 genotype. Offspring were excluded in this analysis because all participants are currently alive and offspring genotype/phenotype is not independent of the probands. Log-Rank (p < 0.0008); Wilcoxon (p < 0.0007). CC, homozygous for -641 C; CA/AA, homozygous and heterozygous for -641 A. 

These findings suggest that the APOC3 genotype may have favorable pleiotropic effects on a number of cardiovascular traits and mortality. Interestingly, while a recent study found that the phenotypic effects of APOC3 polymorphisms are modified by dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids [22], the interactions of APOC3 levels with exercise, body mass index or other environmental effect have not been well studied. Our population by genotype had similar body mass index, suggesting that body weight is not strongly modulated by genotype. The APOC3 gene is located on the long arm of Chromosome 11q23, in tandem with the apolipoprotein A1 and A4 genes [8,26]. The APO A1-C3-A4-A5 gene cluster has been studied extensively in relation to lipoproteins and CVD, and most recently in the oldest old [8,27,28]. Given LD within this gene cluster, we cannot rule outOverrepresented in our centenarians, a finding that was confirmed in oldest old Italians [32]. Low CETP levels, which were explained in part by this CETP variant, were observed in our study [6] and in Japanese centenarians [31]. Sequence variants in another lipoprotein gene, the microsomal transfer protein gene, were implicated in another study of centenarians [7]. This study adds APOC3 to the list of lipoprotein genes that may influence exceptional longevity. Interestingly, all these genes are involved in different steps of lipoprotein metabolism and could potentially be additive in their effects.

Materials and Methods

Study design and participants. In this case-control study, Ashkenazi Jews were recruited as described elsewhere [5,6]. The Ashkenazi population is believed to have descended from a small group of founders based on both historical records and modern genetic evidence. The advantage of using founder populations is that the genetic determinants of a particular disease may be more homogeneous and easier to define, and false positive results due to population stratification are less likely [39]. Indeed, specific mutations in a number of disease genes (e.g., breast cancer gene 1, breast cancer gene 2, adenomatosis polyposis coli gene, hereditary prostate cancer gene) have been initially identified in the Ashkenazi population at prevalence rates consistent with a founder effect [40-44]. Stratification in these studies has not been required, and indeed these genes were later implicated in other populations too [45,46].

Two hundred and thirteen probands with exceptional longevity (157 females and 56 males, age 98.2 (0.36) y [mean (SE)], range 95-107 y; 48% over the age of 100 y) were recruited to participate in the study. The participants' ages were defined by birth certificates or dates of birth as stated on passports. Probands were required to have been living independently when they were 95 y of age as a reflection of good health, although at the time of recruitment, they could be at any level of dependency. In addition, probands were required to have a child who was willing to participate in the study. The offspring group consisted of 122 females and 94 males (age 68.3 [0.45] y, range 51-89 y). The control group included 258 participants derived from two sources: Ashkenazi Jews from the general population recruited by the Einstein Aging Study and spouses of the recruited offspring. The study sample included 183 participants with mean age 71.3 (0.67) y, 57% female [47]. Spouses of offspring included 75 participants with mean age 70.2 (1.17) y, 53% female. These controls as a comparison group similar in age to the offspring are important to overcome the limitation of a cross-sectional sample because the effects of age on genotype, phenotype (APOC3 levels, lipids, etc.), and outcomes (hypertension and longevity) are minimized. Written informed consent was obtained, and the study was approved by the Committee on Clinical Investigations of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.

While the concept that alteration of gene expression or function of a particular gene can alter lifespan has been demonstrated convincingly in lower animal models, it is important to determine if those same genes and mechanisms are relevant to the complex biology of mammals and humans. Evidence to support such a connection is the findings that abnormal nematode daf-16 (a transcription factor) or daf-2 (insulin/IGF-1 receptor homolog) causes juvenile animals to enter a state of diapause called dauer instead of achieving adulthood, thereby extending lifespan [33]. Both of these genes are part of the insulinIGF-I signaling pathway, which has been implicated in longevity in mice [34]. Notably, the expression of vitellogenin (yolk protein/apolipoprotein-like) genes (vit-2 and vit-5) decreases as lifespan increases [35]. This hypothesis has been independently examined in honeybees where the vitellogenin lipoprotein is associated with both modulation of immune function and longevity [36]. We suggest that modulation of apolipoprotein expression could represent one conserved mechanism of life extension influencing lifespan across species from nematodes to humans. Furthermore, one of the regulators of APOC3 expression is Forkhead Box O1 (FOXO-1), a forkhead transcription factor that mediates insulin action [29,30], which is the homolog of the nematodes daf-16 [33,37]. Deletion of the FOXO-1 binding site in mouse hepatocytes annuls the inhibitory action of insulin on hepatic expression of APOC3, and animals that constitutively express active FOXO-1 have participated in the morning to obtain a medical historyFor the Aged in New Haven, Connecticut, all under the aegis of the Association of Jewish Aging Services of North America in Washington, D.C. Statistical analyses involved pairwise crude comparisons of lipid levels and lipid particle sizes among the study groups using the Mann-Whitney U-test because the distributions were skewed. Calculations were carried out using SAS version 6.12 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina, United States) and Stata version 8.2SE (StataCorp, College Station, Texas, United States). Analyses of lipid parameters were stratified by sex due to known differences between female and male lipid profiles and cardiovascular risks [49,50]. Results are expressed as mean (SE). 

Author contributions: NB conceived and designed the experiments. GA, MR, and NB performed the experiments. GA, CBS, ARS, RBL, AB, and NB analyzed the data. GA, MR, CBS, ARS, RBL, AB, and NB contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. GA, MR, CBS, ARS, RBL, AB, and NB wrote the paper.

To consider false positive associations resulting from multiple tests of the 66 SNP (Table S1), a Bonferroni correction was applied to determine the proper level of statistical significance: p < 0.05/66 = 0.0007.

Funding: This work has been supported by grants from the Paul Beeson Physician Faculty Scholar in Aging Award, the Ellison Medical Foundation Senior Scholar Award, NIH RO1 (AG-1872801A1), the General Clinical Research Center (NIH M01-RR12248), and Diabetes Research and Training Center (NIH DK 20541) at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and the Baltimore VA Geriatric Research and Education Clinical Center.

For a comparison of the difference in APOC3 C(641)A genotype frequencies between the groups, the chi-square test was performed. Genotype frequencies of all SNP were found to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. A corrected p-value less than 0.05 was considered the threshold for statistical significance. Given that this is a relatively homogeneous population, stratification was not applied, except to control for gender effects as noted above. The haplotype association test between cases (probands) and controls was performed.

Competing interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

References:

- Cournil A, Kirkwood TB (2001) If you would live long, choose your parents well. Trends in Genetics.
- Perls TT, Wilmoth J, Levenson R, Drinkwater M, Cohen M, et al. (2002) Life-long sustained mortality advantage of siblings of centenarians. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
- Perls TT, Bubrick E, Wager CG, Vijg J, Kruglyak L (2003) Siblings of centenarians live longer. Lancet.
- Barzilai N, Shuldiner AR (2001) Searching for human longevity genes: The future history of gerontology in the post-genomic era. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci.
- Atzmon G, Schechter C, Greiner W, Davidson D, Rennert G, et al. (2004) Clinical phenotype of Families with longevity. J Am Geriatr Soc.
- Barzilai N, Atzmon G, Schechter C, Schaefer EJ, Cupples AL, et al. (2003) Unique lipoprotein phenotype and genotype associated with exceptional longevity. JAMA.
- Geesaman BJ, Benson E, Brewster SJ, Kunkel LM, Blanche H, et al. (2003) Haplotype-based identification of a microsomal transfer protein marker associated with the human lifespan. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
- Groenendijk M, Cantor RM, de Bruin TW, Dallinga-Thie GM (2004) The apolipoprotein I-CIII-AIV gene cluster. Atherosclerosis.
- Reaven GM (1998) Banting lecture. Role of insulin resistance in human disease. Diabetes.
- Matthews DR, Hosker JP, Rudenski AS, Naylor BA, Treacher DF, et al. (1985) Homeostasis model assessment: insulin resistance and beta-cell function from fasting plasma glucose and insulin concentrations in man. Diabetologia.
- Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, Cushman WC, Green LA, et al. (2003) The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: The JNC 7 Report. JAMA.
- Wang JY, Yan SK, Chen BS, Xue H, et al.Epidemiology: 

Barrett JC, Fry B, Maller J, Daly MJ (2005) Haploview: Analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics.

Olivieri O, Martinelli N, Sandri M, Bassi A, Guarini P, et al. (2002) Apolipoprotein C-III, n-polyunsaturated fatty acids, and insulin-resistant T-C APOC gene polymorphism in heart disease patients: Example of gene-diet interaction. Clin Chem.

Ito Y, Azrolan N, O'Connell A, Walsh A, Breslow JL (1990) Hypertriglyceridemia as a result of human apo CIII gene expression in transgenic mice. Science.

Maeda N, Li H, Lee D, Oliver P, Quarfordt SH, et al. (1994) Targeted disruption of the apolipoprotein C-III gene in mice results in hypotriglyceridemia and protection from postprandial hypertriglyceridemia. J Biol Chem.

Takahashi T, Hirano T, Okada K, Adachi M (2003) Apolipoprotein CIII deficiency prevents the development of hypertriglyceridemia in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. Metabolism.

Karathanasis SK (1985) Apolipoprotein multigene family: Tandem organization of human apolipoprotein AI, CIII, and AIV genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.

Garasto S, Rose G, Derango F, Berardelli M, Corsonello A, et al. (2003) The study of APOA, APOC and APOE variability in healthy aging people reveals another paradox in the oldest old subjects. Ann Hum Genet.

Panza F, D'Introno A, Colacicco AM, Capurso C, Capurso S, et al. (2004) Vascular genetic factors and human longevity. Mech Ageing Dev.

Dallinga-Thie GM, Groenendijk M, Blom RN, De Bruin TW, De Kant E (1999) Genetic heterogeneity in the apolipoprotein C-III promoter and effects of insulin. J Lipid Res.

Li WW, Dammerman MM, Smith JD, Metzger S, Breslow JL, et al. (1995) Common genetic variation in the promoter of the human apo CIII gene abolishes regulation by insulin and may contribute to hypertriglyceridemia. J Clin Invest.

Arai Y, Hirose N, Yamamura K, Nakazawa S, Shimizu K, et al. (2000) Deficiency of cholesteryl ester transfer protein and gene polymorphisms of lipoprotein lipase and hepatic lipase are not associated with longevity. J Mol Med.

Lucchi T, Arosio B, Caloni M, Ceconi I, Calabresi C, et al. (2001) [IV polymorphism of the cholesteryl ester transfer protein gene in young and very old individuals]. Ann Ital Med Int.

Murphy CT, Carroll SA, Bargmann CI, Fraser A, Kamath RS, et al. (1998) Genes that act downstream of DAF-2 to influence the lifespan of Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature.

Holzenberger M, Dupont J, Ducos B, Leneuve P, Geloen A, et al. (2003) IGF-1 receptor regulates lifespan and resistance to oxidative stress in mice. Nature.

Kenyon C (2010) A conserved regulatory system for aging. Cell.