Bitter Taste Receptor Polymorphisms and Human Aging, Francesco De, Maura Carrai, Paolina Crocco, Alberto Montesanto, Federico Canzian, Giuseppina Rose, Cosmeri Rizzato, Giuseppe Passarino, and Roberto Barale. 

Abstract: Several studies have shown that genetic factors account for 25% of the variation in human lifespan. Based on published molecular, genetic, and epidemiological data, we hypothesized that genetic polymorphisms of taste receptors - which modulate food preferences but are also expressed in various organs and regulate food absorption processing and metabolism - could modulate the aging process. Using a tagging approach, we investigated the possible associations between longevity and the common genetic variation at the three bitter taste receptor gene clusters on chromosomes 5, 7, and 12 in a population of 941 individuals ranging in age from 20 to 106 years from the South of Italy. We found that one polymorphism, rs978739 - situated 212 bp upstream of the TAS2R16 gene - shows a statistically significant association (p=0.001) with longevity. In particular, the frequency of A/A homozygotes increases gradually from 35% in subjects aged 20 to 70 up to 55% in centenarians. These data provide suggestive evidence on the possible correlation between human longevity and taste genetics.

Citation: Campa D, De Rango F, Carrai M, Crocco P, Montesanto A et al. (2012) Bitter Taste Receptor Polymorphisms and Human Aging. PLoS ONE 7(11): doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0045232

Introduction: Epidemiological studies may find it difficult to obtain reliable information on diet style during early decades of life from elders who likely influenced later health status significantly. Since there are several indications that bitter taste gene polymorphisms can influence food choice, we considered it of interest to investigate the possible association between bitter taste and longevity. Based on molecular, genetic, and epidemiological data from the literature, we hypothesized that genetic polymorphisms of taste receptors - which modulate food preferences but are also expressed in various organs and regulate food absorption and processing - could modulate the aging process.

Several studies, including various genome-wide association studies, have demonstrated the existence of a significant familial and genetic component of longevity. Twin studies have highlighted that approximately 25% of the overall variation in human lifespan can be attributed to genetic factors, which become more relevant after 60 years of age. The research on the genetic component of human longevity has been focused on conserved pathways related to stress response signalling, DNA repair, and the storage and use of nutrients. Studies on centenarians or long-lived subjects allowed identifying specific genes and genotypes involved in these pathways that influence human lifespan. In particular, the variability and expression of genes involved in the storage and use of nutrients have shown to influence both longevity and the quality of aging.

For example, the TAS2R38 gene is characterized by three non-synonymous coding SNPs (rs713598 - G145C, Ala49Pro; rs1726866 - T785C, Val262Ala; rs10246939 - A886G, Ile296Val) that give rise to several haplotypes. Subjects possessing at least one copy of the PAV haplotype (i.e., alleles coding for proline at rs713598, alanine at rs1726866 and valine at rs10246939) are significantly more responsive to the bitter tastants PROP, PTC, and chemically similar compounds. Such individuals display the so-called taster phenotype and are distinct from those who are homozygous for the AVI haplotype and display the so-called non-taster phenotype. Tasters show a reduction in their intake of several vegetables such as cabbage, spinach, and lettuce. Given the importance of diet in longevity, genetic variation in taste receptors could directly affect healthy aging by modulating food preference during life.

The importance of nutrients in the aging process is also witnessed by overwhelming epidemiological evidence that diet and nutrition can affect growth, the development of the body during childhood, the risk of acute and chronic diseases during adulthood, the maintenance of physiological processes, and the biological process of aging. In particular, diets rich in vegetables seem to be associated with a significant increase in longevity and wellness. Taste receptor genes play a much broader role in human health. Genes of TAS1R-TAS2R gene family express membrane taste receptors in neuroendocrine cells of several organs of the system. These cells start the regulation of a variety of functions, including appetite, satiety, the proliferation of GI cells, secretory activity of the stomach, liver and intestine motility, and gall bladder contraction. A correlation has been observed between polymorphic variants in various taste receptors and homeThe following text has been processed:

The study received approval from the Ethical committee of the University of Calabria. All participants provided written informed consent for the aging study carried out by our research group. White blood cells (WBC) from blood buffy coats were used as a source of DNA. Between 1994 and 2008, 941 unrelated individuals were recruited in Calabria, including 348 very elderly cases ($85 years, range 85106 years, mean age 93.8264.44 years, median age 92) and 593 non-elderly controls (,85 years, range 2084 years, mean age 59.17619.45 years, median age 67 years). We selected 85 as a cut-off point since genetic factors contribute minimally to human life span variation before age 60 and more profoundly from age 85 [13]. Study participants and their parents were selected for tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in bitter taste receptors located on chromosomes 5, 7, and 12. We used a hybrid tagging-functional approach that selected all common genetic variants in these regions. The Tagger program within Haploview was used to select tagging SNPs with pairwise tagging and a minimum r2 of 0.8. We included all polymorphisms with minor allele frequency (MAF) $5% in Caucasians from the International HapMap Project version 28 (August 2010). The final selection included 41 SNPs belonging to 20 genes. Figures 1-3 show the selected polymorphisms in each region along with distance and linkage disequilibrium between SNPs within the same chromosome. DNA was extracted from blood samples using standard proteinase K digestion followed by phenol/chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation. Genotyping was carried out using Kaspar or Taqman assays and PCR plates were read on an ABI PRISM 7900HT instrument. Individual haplotypes were statistically inferred using the PHASE v.2.1.1 algorithm based on a Bayesian approach. The distribution of genotypes and their odds ratios (ORs) for association with longevity are shown in Table S2. We found five significant associations between SNPs in the chromosome 7 cluster and longevity at the conventional level of p<0.05. Only carriers of the G allele of rs978739 variation showed a statistically significant association after correction for multiple testing. Haplotype analysis showed no significant association with longevity, although the TAS2R16 gene haplotype (rs1357949 rs6466849rs860170rs978739: T_A_A_G) showed a suggestive association with longevity (OR=0.74, 95% CI 0.560.98, p=0.033). The haplotype rs2588350 (TAS2R7)- rs619381(TAS2R9)-rs3741845(TAS2R9): G_G_T showed an association with increased longevity at the conventional 0.05 P-value (OR=1.35, 95% CI 1.021.78, p=0.037). No interactions between SNPs emerged with a study-wise significant p-value from pairwise interactions analyzed using the MDR method.
This text appears to be a scientific article discussing the association between longevity and genetic polymorphisms related to bitter taste perception. Here is the processed text:

The chart depicts the age-genotype association between the TAS2R16rs 978739 polymorphism and longevity. The A/A genotype frequency is approximately 40.5% in young and adult classes (20-50 and 51-70 years). Subsequently, the frequency of A/A genotype increases through older classes, reaching 55.5% in the oldest age group (x2=17.08, p<0.029). 

In this study, we investigated possible associations between longevity and 41 SNPs in 20 candidate genes involved in bitter taste perception. Our findings suggest that harmful compounds recognized by these genes throughout an organism's lifespan could modify an individual's chances of reaching old age. However, there is another possible explanation for the involvement of TAS2R16 genetic variability in healthy aging. Recent studies have shown that taste receptors are expressed in various tissues, including the respiratory system, gastrointestinal tract, and testis, where they can affect different physiological functions. Therefore, these genes could behave as pleiotropic genes whose products are used by various cells or have signaling functions on various targets not linked directly to each other.

Our SNP tagging approach and haplotype analysis provide a close-to-exhaustive analysis of the possible associations of longevity with common polymorphic variants at bitter taste receptor loci. We found that five polymorphisms were associated with longevity: three in the TAS2R16 gene (rs6466849, rs860170, and rs978739), one in the TAS2R4 gene (rs2233998), and two in the TAS2R5 gene (rs2227264). After correction for multiple testing, only one polymorphism - rs978739 - showed a statistically significant association with longevity (p=0.001). Specifically, the frequency of homozygotes A/A increased gradually from 35% in the subjects aged 20 to 70 up to 55% in centenarians. A distribution of genotypes through various age strata is given in Figure 4.

TAS2R16 mediates the detection of naturally occurring bitter compounds such as salicin, amygdalin, arbutin, helicin, sinigrin, and phenyl beta-D-glucopyranoside. Several of these compounds have pharmacological effects and are present in human food. For example, arbutin is present in pears, bearberries, and wheat and has been reported to be a strong inhibitor of bladder cancer proliferation. Amygdalin is found in several fruit seeds and has been reported to have apoptotic activity and to inhibit cell cycle genes, although its real effect on cancer remains controversial. Sinigrin is found in plants of the Brassicaceae family such as broccoli, Brussels sprouts, and the seeds of black mustard. It has been proposed to have a preventive effect on colorectal cancer and to inhibit bladder cancer. The bark and leaf of willow species contain the prodrug salicin; following absorption, salicin is metabolized into various salicylate derivatives. Salicin has effects similar to aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) on analgesia and as an anti-inflammatory agent. These reports point to a role for the TAS2R16 receptor in recognizing beneficial molecules with which the organism interacts during life. Impaired function of the receptor might affect the efficacy of various compounds and lead to long-term disadvantages for the organism.

In conclusion, our findings suggest that variation in TAS2R16 receptor function due to genetic polymorphisms may modulate how many beneficial and harmful molecules an organism interacts with during life. Additionally, our results support a role of variation in the TAS2R16 receptor in recognizing and modulating the effect of both beneficial and harmful molecules. 

The Supporting Information section includes tables showing the genes and SNPs selected for the study, logistic regression analysis for taste SNPs, haplotypes of different genes, and their association with longevity. The author contributions and acknowledgments are also included. 

References to related studies are provided at the end of the article.These are references for scientific articles on topics related to genetics, nutrition, and longevity. They have been listed in an unformatted manner. 

PROCESSED TEXT: 

Kerber RA, O'Brien E, Smith KR, Cawthon RM. (2001) Familial excess longevity in Utah genealogies. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci: B.
Montesanto A, Latorre V, Giordano M, Martino C, Domma F, et al. (2012) The genetic component of human longevity: analysis of the survival advantage of parents and siblings of Italian nonagenarians. Eur J Hum Genet.
Perls T, Shea-Drinkwater M, Bowen-Flynn J, Ridge SB, Kang S, et al. (2000) Exceptional familial clustering for extreme longevity in humans. J Am Geriatr Soc.
Perls T, Terry DF, Silver M, Shea M, Bowen J, et al. (2002) Centenarians and the genetics of longevity. Results Probl Cell Differ.
Perls TT, Wilmoth J, Levenson R, Drinkwater M, Cohen M, et al. (2002) Lifelong sustained mortality advantage of siblings of centenarians. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
Schoenmaker M, de Craen AJ, de Meijer PH, Beekman M, Blauw GJ, et al. (2006) Evidence of genetic enrichment for exceptional survival using a family approach: the Leiden Longevity Study. Eur J Hum Genet.
Willcox BJ, Willcox DC, He Q, Curb JD, Suzuki M (2006) Siblings of Okinawan centenarians share lifelong mortality advantages. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci.
Herskind AM, Due Mue , Holm NV, Sorensen TI, Harvald B, et al. (1996) The heritability of human longevity: a population-based study of Danish twin pairs born. Hum Genet.
Ljungquist B, Berg S, Lanke J, M learn GE, Pedersen NL (1998) The effect of genetic factors for longevity: a comparison of identical and fraternal twins in the Swedish Twin Registry. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci.
Skytthe A, Pedersen NL, Kaprio J, Stazi MA, Hjelmborg JV, et al. (2006) Longevity studies in GenoUtwin. Twin Res.
Hjelmborg JB, Iachine I, Skytthe A, Vaupel JW, Due Mue , et al. (2006) Genetic influence on human lifespan and longevity. Hum Genet.
Fontana L, Partridge L, Longo VD (2010) Extending healthy lifespan from yeast to humans. Science.
Kenyon CJ (2010) The genetics of ageing. Nature.
Bonafe M, Olivieri F (2013) Genetic polymorphism in long-lived people: cues for the presence of an insulin/IGF-pathway-dependent network affecting human longevity. Mol Cell Endocrinol.
Christensen K, Johnson TE, Vaupel JW (2006) The quest for genetic determinants of human longevity: challenges and insights. Nat Rev Genet.
Chung WH, Dao RL, Chen LK, Hung SI (2010) The role of genetic variants in human longevity. Ageing Res Rev Suppl: S.
Slagboom PE, Beekman M, Passtoors WM, Deelen J, Vaarhorst AA, et al. (2017) Genomics of human longevity. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci.
Parrella E, Longo VD (2010) Insulin/IGF-I and related signaling pathways regulate aging in nondividing cells: from yeast to the mammalian brain. Scientific World Journal.
Fontana L (2009) The scientific basis of caloric restriction leading to longer life. Curr Opin Gastroenterol.
Ford JH (2015) Saturated fatty acid metabolism is key link between cell division, cancer, and senescence in cellular and whole organism aging. Age (Dordr).
Willcox DC, Willcox BJ, Todoriki H, Suzuki M (2009) The Okinawan diet: health implications of a low-calorie, nutrient-dense, antioxidant-rich dietary pattern low in glycemic load. J Am Coll Nutr Suppl: S.
Barker DJ, Osmond C (1986) Infant mortality, childhood nutrition, and ischaemic heart disease in England and Wales. Lancet.
de Magalhaes JP, Wuttke D, Wood SH, Plank M, Vora C (2012) Genome-environment interactions that modulate agingProcessed Text:

Taste receptor Curr Biol: Hayes JE, Wallace MR, Knopik VS, Herbstman DM, Bartoshuk LM, et al. Allelic variation in TAS2R bitter receptor genes associates with sensations from and ingestive behaviors toward common bitter beverages in adults. Chem Senses: Wang JC, Hinrichs AL, Bertelsen S, Stock H, Budde JP, et al. Variants in TAS2R and TAS2R16 influence alcohol consumption in families of African-American origin. Alcohol Clin Exp Res: Hinrichs AL, Wang JC, Bufe B, Kwon JM, Budde J, et al. A variant in a bitter-taste receptor (TAS2R) influences the risk of dependence. Am J Hum Genet: Behrens M, Meyerhof W. Oral and extraoral bitter taste receptors. Probl Cell Differ: Li F, Zhou M. Depletion of bitter taste transduction leads to spermatid loss in transgenic mice. Mol Hum Reprod. Wooding S. Phenylthiocarbamide: a 75-year adventure in genetics Curr Opin Gastroenterol: Rozengurt E. Taste receptors in the gastrointestinal tract. I. Bitter taste receptors and alpha-gustducin in the mammalian gut. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol: Sternini C. Taste receptors in the gastrointestinal tract. IV. Functional implications of bitter taste receptors in gastrointestinal chemosensing. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol: Dotson CD, Zhang L, Xu H, Shin YK, Vigues S, et al. Bitter taste receptors influence glucose homeostasis. PLoS One: e Narasimhan SD, Yen K, Bansal A, Kwon ES, Padmanabhan S, et al. PDP-1 links the TGF-beta and IIS pathways to regulate longevity, development, and metabolism. PLoS Genet: e Hayes JE. Response to Lack of relation between bitter taste receptor TAS2R and BMI in adults. Obesity (Silver Spring): Tepper BJ, Koelliker Y, Zhao L, Ullrich NV, Lanzara C, et al. Variation in the bitter-taste receptor gene TAS2R38 and adiposity in a genetically isolated population in Southern Italy. Obesity (Silver Spring): Carrai M, Steinke V, Vodicka P, Pardini B, Rahner N, et al. Association between TAS2R gene polymorphisms and colorectal cancer risk: a case-control study in two independent populations of Caucasian origin. PLoS One: e Duffy VB, Davidson AC, Kidd JR, Kidd KK, Speed WC, et al. Bitter receptor gene (TAS2R), -n-propylthiouracil (PROP) bitterness and alcohol intake. Alcohol Clin Exp Res: Cannon DS, Baker TB, Piper ME, Scholand MB, Lawrence DL, et al. Associations between phenylthiocarbamide gene polymorphisms and cigarette smoking. Nicotine Tob Res: Mangold JE, Payne TJ, Ma JZ, Chen G, Li MD. Bitter taste receptor gene polymorphisms are an important factor in the development of nicotine dependence in African Americans. J Med Genet: Carlson CS, Eberle MA, Rieder MJ, Yi Q, Kruglyak L, et al. Selecting a maximally informative set of single-nucleotide polymorphisms for association analyses using linkage disequilibrium. Am J Hum Genet: Barrett JC, Fry B, Maller J, Daly MJ. Haploview: analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics: de Bakker PI, Yelensky R, Peer I, Gabriel SB, Daly MJ, et al. Efficiency and power in genetic association studies. Nat Genet: Chen B, Wilkening S, Drechsel M, Hemminki K. SNP_tools: A compact tool package for analysis and conversion of genotype data for MS-Excel. BMC Res Notes: Gabriel SB, Schaffner SF, Nguyen H, Moore JM, Roy J, et al. The