several mitochondrial DNA haplogroups that are correlated with extreme longevity in Japan. The study analyzed data from supercentenarians, centenarians, healthy non-obese males, obese young males, and patients with diabetes, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease. The analysis used two different methods to identify correlations between mitochondrial polymorphisms and longevity. The results showed a progressive enrichment of certain beneficial patterns in the D4a haplogroup for centenarians and semi-supercentenarians. However, the correlations were found to be entirely due to population structure rather than functional mtDNA SNPs. The study suggests that hitch-hiking on autosomal events is a possible explanation for the observed correlations. The analysis was limited to mtDNA sequences, as genome-wide data is not yet available. The study was approved by the Committees on the Ethics of Human Research and written informed consent was obtained from each participant or a member of their immediate family.The mtSNP 14979C (Cytb: Ile78Thr) in D4a has been found to be correlated with extreme longevity. To investigate whether this mtSNP might be hitchhiking on nuclear SNPs, we searched for association signatures of enrichment in the Japanese D clade samples in HapMap [5]. However, the SNP density in HapMap is too low to allow any definite conclusions.

Materials and Methods:

Figure 1 displays the age distribution of the samples used in the present study. The data comes from two sources. The first source is Tanaka et al [6], consisting of 672 complete mitochondrial DNA sequences divided into sets of 96 samples in each of seven phenotypes: JD or diabetic patients with severe angiopathy (mean age ...). The sequences are attached in FASTA format in Data S1. The other sequences used in this paper can be downloaded from http://mtsnp.tmig.or.jp/mtsnp/search_mtDNA_sequence_e.html. The centenarian (i.e., non-target or NT) groups correspond to healthy non-obese males, obese young males, diabetics with and without angiopathy, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease patients.

The statistics L are motivated by an analogy with the t-test. We pairwise aligned the 672 sequences from [6] and the 112 new semi-super-centenarian sequences relative to the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence rCRS (http://www.mitomap.org/mitoseq.html) using the Miller-Meyers [8] algorithm as implemented in the Stretcher module in EMBOSS (http://emboss.sourceforge.net/). We applied a robust technique developed in [9] to the 672 sequences, which identified all robust mutations in the data using Principal Component Spectral Analysis [10-21] to identify the mutations that represent most of the variation in the data. Following this, we separated the samples into haplogroup clusters by applying an ensemble consensus clustering technique, which averages over probabilistic, agglomerative, and hierarchical clustering methods and many data perturbations to build an agreement matrix from which a robust set of clusters is determined along with patterns of discriminatory mutations [9]. The optimum number of clusters (kmax) was estimated using the silhouette score [11] and gap statistics [12]. We validated the robustness and statistical significance of the clusters and mutations by averaging over ten 2:1 training/test bootstrapped datasets on which we repeated the complete clustering analysis. Only 90% or higher sample assignments into clusters and predictive mutations were accepted.

This analysis clustered the 672 Japanese samples into 31 robust haplogroups after discarding samples with ambiguous membership in the clustering analysis because of small sample size. The 31 haplogroups, as defined in Tanaka et al. [6] and confirmed by our unsupervised consensus ensemble clustering technique [9], were: A, B4a, B4b, B4c, B5, D4a, D4b1a, D4b1b, D4b2a, D4b2b, D4d1a, D4d1b, D4e1, D4e2, D4g, D4h, D5a, D5b, F1, F2, M10, M7a, M7b, M8, M9, C, G1, G2, Z, N9a and N9b. We also found 261 SNPs in the patterns of mutation that are characteristic markers for these haplogroups. The 112 semi-supercentenarian sequences were classified into haplogroups based on the patterns of these 261 characteristic SNPs.

A similar score that measures haplogroup enrichment for longevity is defined as:

This measure is defined for each haplogroup H. fT is the H fraction of samples in the target (longevity) group (either centenarians or semi-supercentenarians) that belong to the haplogroup H, fC is the fraction of samples in the control group S (healthy non-obese males) that belong to the haplogroup H, and sNT is the standard deviation of these fractions across the 6 non-H target groups.

We used the method of [13] to identify maximal bicliques. We define a biclique as a set of polymorphisms shared by at least 5 samples across all the data, independent of the haplogroups or phenotypes. The algorithm looks for combinations of sets of mutations (bi-cliques) that are shared by five or more individuals in the data, using a recursive algorithm that combines the sets onto bigger sets until all maximal sets are identified. The software for this algorithm along with a brief description is available at http://genome.cs.iastate.edu/supertree/download/biclique. These bi-cliquesto other haplogroups and is also a non-synonymous mutation. The population structure can be identified by analyzing the large eigenvalues of the SNP-SNP correlation matrix. The SNPs with large coefficients in these eigenvectors represent the polymorphisms which will be found on the tree representing the phylogeny of the samples in the data. If the data is projected onto these large eigenmode principal components, it will split into classes representing the phylogeny of their common ancestry. Thus, the eigenvectors corresponding to the set of large eigenmodes represent variation due to population structure and those corresponding to the set of small eigenmodes represent potentially real functional polymorphisms. If there is a strong correlation between the phenotype and the SNPs with large coefficients in the eigenvectors of large eigenmodes, then this represents population structure related events such as diet, climate, founder effects, etc. Conversely, if the correlation is functional, there should be a strong correlation between the phenotype and the projection of the SNP matrix onto its lower eigenmodes. Such a correlation would be expected to be similar to pattern-based feature selection.

The score mentioned above is essentially the ratio between the numbers of times SNP i and SNP j appear together in the same enriched pattern and the total number of patterns that have both mutations. The agreement matrix is diagonal and symmetric. The diagonal entries represent the greatest possible correlation between SNP i and SNP j. Setting the diagonal entries to 1 sets a threshold in the matrix for the greatest possible correlation between SNP i and SNP j. This is useful when we use the matrix to identify correlated cliques by thinking of it as a connectivity matrix for a graph where nodes (labeled by index i) are SNP locations and nodes i and j are considered linked by a bond if their correlation is greater than some threshold t. By successively lowering the value of the threshold from higher to lower values, one can identify the core set of SNPs that form a clique, which is a set of SNPs where each pairwise correlation exceeds the threshold. Rows and columns of the matrix are then sorted (clustered) to place the clique SNPs in the top-left corner. Color coding of the resulting matrix based on the entry values produces a heat map showing mtSNPs at different levels of enrichment.

To look for an association between the mtDNA polymorphisms and their haplogroups with nuclear mutations and pathways, we analyzed the 44 Japanese samples in the HapMap database. Of these, 16 samples were classified by HapMap as belonging to the D clade using mtDNA markers. However, the SNP density in the HapMap database was insufficient for further sub-classification into D sub-haplogroups. Enrichment of mutations in the samples from the D clade with respect to the rest of the haplogroups was identified and its significance assessed using a chi-squared test.

The decision on where to place the cutoff to separate high eigenmodes from low eigenmodes is made using the Tracy-Widom distribution (see [21] for a detailed description and references to the literature), which provides the basis for the null hypothesis. Consider a matrix M of dimension N x N SNP samples (where N and N represent the number of SNPs and the SNP samples number of samples in the original data). Assume that the entries M are independent standard Normal Gaussian distributed variables for each SNP location. The product of M and its transpose MT represents the correlation matrix of SNP-SNP correlations which would be obtained by chance. The distribution of eigenvalues of MMT is the Tracy-Widom distribution which represents the null-probability to get a high eigenvalue by chance in data without population structure. We use a simple method (chosen to have a p-value, 0.05) to find the cutoff x in eigenvalue to separate population structure from functional polymorphisms. We identify the highest k eigenvalues in the real data that represent more than a fraction f=0.95 of the variation in the data as those representing population structure [21]. x is easily obtained by first finding k by solving: f= [S k l]/N where the SNP eigenvalues l are sorted from highest to lowest value. The value of x is then obtained from: x= (l+k)/2.

It is known that population structure can introduce artificial correlations between SNPs and phenotypes, as seen in SNPs in the lactase gene that spuriously correlates with the height phenotype. These spurious correlations can be easily understood by considering a simple example: imagine one homogeneous population that splits into two. Each of these populations evolves independently and develops a set of SNPs (markers) that clearly differentiate them. All these SNPs appeared as linked because of the common ancestry of these populations. If, for any reason, one population has a different phenotype (height, disease, longevity) than the other, all these SNPs will correlate with the phenotype. However, this correlation doesIn this study, we analyzed the frequencies of enriched patterns in various haplogroups to determine the correlation between mtDNA SNPs and longevity in Japanese individuals. Our results confirm previous observations that the D4a haplogroup, along with many haplogroups in the D4 clade, is enriched for longevity. The significance scores for maximal patterns of mutations in the data are shown in Figure 2, while Figure 3 shows the significance score for the enrichment of SNPs in three data sets of centenarians and semi-supercentenarians compared to healthy normals.

We found that 45 mtSNPs were significantly correlated with longevity after correcting for multiple hypotheses. However, our analysis suggests that there are no functional mtSNPs significantly correlated with longevity and that all significant correlations seem to be associated only with population structure. This suggests that protective mutations on nuclear chromosomes, in addition to the defining mtDNA SNPs for D4a, are necessary for the longevity phenotype.

A limitation of our study is the small sample size and lack of direct correlation with SNPs on nuclear chromosomes. We are currently trying to mitigate this problem by identifying nuclear SNPs associated with our samples on the complexes formed by proteins encoded by mtDNA.

In conclusion, our results suggest a possible scenario for the evolution of a longevity phenotype, which may develop by combinations of protective mutations. The nuclear-mitochondrial interaction model for longevity may be an attractive working hypothesis to be examined by resequencing projects targeting Asian- or Japanese-specific nuclear genome variations. The resequencing projects focusing on mitochondrial genome in Japanese semi-supercentenarians reported here is a landmark for the start of investigation on longevity-associated nuclear genome polymorphisms.

Table 1 lists the most frequent mtSNPs from enhanced patterns in semi-supercentenarians vs. healthy normals. These mtSNPs are mainly concentrated in the hypervariable regions of the mtDNA control region, with locations 16129, 152, and 489 being mutational hotspots in HVS-I, HVS-II, and HVS-III, respectively.Similarly, the locus 3010 is also a mutational hotspot found in many disparate haplogroups. Because of this, it is difficult to convincingly demonstrate and/or validate any possible association of these hotspot polymorphisms with longevity. It is difficult to say whether their appearance in our analysis is due to chance or reflects some deeper epigenetic effect in association with other polymorphisms on autosomes. The enriched loci identified in this study are 3206T, 8473C, 14979C and 10410C, of which the first three are defining markers for D4a and the fourth (10410C) is enriched (80% to 20%) in D4a compared to its wild-type form 10410T. This polymorphism is a known identifying marker for subhaplogroup D4a1 [30]. Its identification in our analysis may reflect a further refinement of the association of longevity within D4a. However, our sample size is inadequate to pursue this further in the present study. There are two ways in which any group of polymorphisms might associate with a phenotype. The most direct way is if their presence alone confers the phenotype. An indirect way is if the polymorphisms are merely associated (correlated) with the phenotype because of population structure. Our spectral analysis suggests that the latter association is what is actually realized in the data. This does not mean that the association between D4a and longevity is spurious; only that the correlation between the defining SNPs for D4a and longevity is spurious. The longevity phenotype appears to correlate with D4a because it appeared due to factors other than the defining SNPs of D4a. Whereas there are many other sources of association (diet, lifestyle, etc.), one possibility is that the D4a haplogroup is enriched in autosomal SNPs that confer the longevity phenotype. Whereas our paper raises this as a strong possibility, our efforts to identify such autosomal correlations in the HapMap dataset were unsuccessful because of the limited sample size of the D haplogroup and the limited SNP coverage in the HapMap study. The hypothesis of association between D4a and longevity due to autosomal polymorphisms can be tested by a study involving more individuals in the D haplogroup in Japan and elsewhere. It is particularly important in this context to include D4a individuals outside Japan to rule out associations due to diet and lifestyle. Column 2 shows the haplogroup specificity for the SNP. The next two columns show the nucleotide in rCRS and the mutation. The last two columns are for the corresponding gene and the sense of the mutation, synonymous or nonsynonymous. SNPs shown in bold blue are the six SNPs in the top left corner of Figure 5, which are most correlated with patterns enriched in the longevity group. Note that these are either nonspecific or markers for haplogroup D4a. The locations 152 and 16129 are known mutational hotspots in the hypervariable regions HVS-II and HVS-I respectively, and hence their correlation with longevity cannot be considered significant. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002421.t001 Experiments with xenocybrids carrying human nuclear genome and various primate mitochondrial genome indicate that mismatches between mtDNA and nDNA gene products within the OXPHOS complexes result in decreased enzyme activities and/or increased production of reactive oxygen species from the mitochondria [26-28]. The finding that subhaplogroup D4a is one of the most frequent ones in Japanese suggests that this mitochondrial subhaplogroup may be compatible with major variants of the nDNA-encoded subunits of the OXPHOS complexes. Over a longer term, we plan to apply the techniques discussed in this paper to more extensive genome-wide association studies using SNP chips to find pathways correlated with complex Supporting Information Table 2. The top enhanced SNPs in the D clade in the Japanese samples in Hapmap [5]. #SNP rs# SNP position Gene(s) Role aa change genotypes p-value rs12960296 chr18:49408898 GG[68.75%] GT[18.75%] TT[12.5%] 1.11E-05 rs17439885 chr18:49417508 AA[68.75%] AG[18.75%] GG[12.5%] 1.11E-05 rs5766424 chr22:43823070 AA[6.25%] AG[81.25%] GG[12.5%] 1.57E-05 rs3802082 chr7:17143421 AHR Intron - AA[62.5%] AT[31.25%] TT[6.25%] 1.63E-05 rs13381188 chr18:493(2006) Price AL, Patterson NJ, Plenge RM, Weinblatt ME, Shadick NA, et al. (2006) Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet 38: 904-909. 
(2006) Patterson N, Price AL, Reich D (2006) Population structure and eigenanalysis. PLoS Genet 2: e190. 
(2014) Tanaka M, Fuku N, Nishigaki Y, Matsuo H, Segawa T, et al. (2014) Women with Mitochondrial Haplogroup Na are Protected Against Metabolic Syndrome. Diabetes 63: 1442-1450.
(2007) Fuku N, Park KS, Yamada Y, Nishigaki Y, Cho YM, et al. (2007) Mitochondrial Haplogroup Na Confers Resistance against Type 2 Diabetes in Asians. Am J of Hum Genet 80: 407-415.
(2006) Mishmar D, Ruiz-Pesini E, Mondragon-Polomino M, Procaccio V, Gaut B, et al. (2006) Adaptive selection of mitochondrial complex I subunits during primate radiation. Gene 378: 11-18.
(2002) Barrientos A, Kenyon L, Moraes CT (2002) Human xenomitochondrial cybrids. Cellular models of mitochondrial complex I deficiency. J Biol Chem 277: 9-12.
(2003) Barrientos A, Muller S, Dey R, Wienberg J, Moraes CT (2003) Cytochrome c oxidase assembly in primates is sensitive to small evolutionary variations in amino acid sequence. Mol Biol Evol 20: 174-182.
(2005) Bayona-Bafaluy MP, Muller S, Moraes CT (2005) Fast adaptive coevolution of nuclear and mitochondrial subunits of ATP synthetase in orangutan. Mol Biol Evol 22: 716-724.
(2001) Bandelt HJ, Richards M, Macauley V (2001) Human Mitochondrial DNA and the Evolution of Homo sapiens. Springer Verlag, ISBN-978-3-540-67795-1.
(2011) Kong QP, Bandelt HJ, Sun C, Yao YG, Salas A, et al. (2011) Updating the East Asian mtDNA phylogeny: a prerequisite for the identification of pathogenic mutations. Human Molecular Genetics 20: 3063-3072.