High-Density Genome-Wide Linkage Analysis of Exceptional Human Longevity Identifies Multiple Novel Loci

Steven E. Boyden1,2, Louis M.

1Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America, 2Program in Genomics, Division of Genetics, and The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America, 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America

Abstract

Background: Human lifespan is approximately 25% heritable, and genetic factors may be particularly important for achieving exceptional longevity. Accordingly, siblings of centenarians have a dramatically higher probability of reaching extreme old age than the general population.

Methodology/Principal Findings: To map the loci conferring a survival advantage, we performed the second linkage scan on human longevity and the first using a high-density marker panel of single nucleotide polymorphisms. Systematically testing a range of minimum age cutoffs in 279 families with multiple long-lived siblings, we identified a locus on chromosome 3p24-22 with a genome-wide significant allele-sharing LOD score of 4.02 (empirical P= 0.037) and a locus on chromosome 9q31-34 with a highly suggestive LOD score of 3.89 (empirical P= 0.054). The empirical P value for the combined result was 0.002. A third novel locus with a LOD score of 4.05 on chromosome 12q24 was detected in a subset of the data, and we also obtained modest evidence for a previously reported interval on chromosome 4q22-25.

Conclusions/Significance: Our linkage data should facilitate the discovery of both common and rare variants that determine genetic variability in lifespan.

Funding: This work was supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. Microarray genotyping experiments were performed using equipment in the Microarray Core Facility of the Molecular Genetics Core Facility at Children's Hospital Boston, supported by NIH-P30-HD18655 through the Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center and NIH-P50-NS40828 through the Neuromuscular Disease Project. LMK is an investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

* E-mail: kunkel@enders.tch.harvard.edu

Introduction

Estimates of the heritability of normal human lifespan range from 10% to 58%, averaging about 25% [19]. The genetic contribution to lifespan grows markedly after age 60, indicating that the heritability of exceptional longevity may be substantially higher than these estimates [20]. The relative survival probability for siblings of centenarians increases steadily with age until male and female siblings have a 17-fold and 8-fold increased chance, respectively, of reaching age 100 compared to others from their birth cohort [21]. Moreover, while natural lifespan is likely a complex trait controlled by many genes with small effect sizes, extreme longevity may be determined by fewer genes of stronger effect [22,23] and may therefore be amenable to linkage analysis.

The only previous genome-wide scan for linkage to longevity was conducted in part by a member of our group (LMK) and identified a region on chromosome 4q22-25 as significantly linked in 137 sibships of centenarians and nonagenarians [24]. A subsequent genome-wide scan for healthy aging in a smaller and younger cohort provided weak support for the chromosome 4q22-25 linkage [25], whereas a targeted study of 164 sibships of nonagenarians did not find linkage to the locus [26], nor did a genome-wide scan on bone characteristics as a biomarker for biological aging [27]. All these studies used microsatellite markers with 510 cM spacing. To assess the linkage to chromosome 4 and identify new loci, we performed the most powerful linkage scan to date on exceptional longevity. Though the evidence for linkage to chromosome 4 remains equivocal, several novel loci were discovered in our scan, including a region on chromosome 3p24-22 with an empirically genome-wide significant LOD score of 4.02 and a region on chromosome 9q31-34 with a LOD score of 3.89.

Subjects

All subjects provided proof of age. There was a predominance of female subjects in our cohort, likely reflecting the original ascertainment criterion of having a proband of at least 98 years of age regardless of gender [24]. Only self-identified white or Caucasian subjects (the vast majority of our cohort) were analyzed since population stratification can confound non-parametric linkage analysis when parental genotypes are unobserved [increase in longevity, assuming a heritability of 0.3 and a genomewide significance threshold of LOD=3.6. Our study identified two chromosomal regions, on 3p24-22 and 9q31-34, respectively, with overall maximum LOD scores of 4.02 and 3.89 in specific age categories. The stability of these linkage peaks was confirmed using different SNP subsets. The hLOD scores suggested a dominant mode of inheritance for both peaks, with reduced locus heterogeneity in the oldest sibships for the chromosome 9 peak. The use of SNP arrays provided substantial improvements in power over previous microsatellite panels. Our findings provide new insights into the genetic basis of exceptional longevity and may lead to the identification of novel longevity-associated genes.analysis), respectively. The text discusses the results of a study on human aging and genetics. The study identified three novel loci of interest on chromosomes 3p24-22, 9q31-34, and 12q24 using nonparametric linkage analysis. The results were supported by parametric analysis and warrant replication studies. The study did not provide substantial evidence for linkage to FOXO3 or APOE genes. The text also mentions the characteristics of the linkage peaks and candidate genes in the identified loci.The text seems to be a combination of tables, figures, and results from a scientific paper. As an AI language model, I cannot determine the exact formatting of the original source document, so I will focus on correcting any spelling, grammar, and coherence issues in the text to improve its readability. Here is the processed text:

The study reports nonparametric linkage data for four subgroups, namely Previous, New, MC, and FO. The boundaries for the Total group for chromosomes 3 and 9, the New subgroup for chromosome 12, and the Previous subgroup for chromosome 4 are identified. The boundaries of the chromosome 9 peak are a composite of Categories 8 and 9 which had overlapping but slightly offset peaks of similar magnitude. NA indicates that scores were not noted or P values were not determined. Category 5 indicates that this category has been identified. Category 9 indicates that this category has been identified as well. Category 2 indicates that this category has also been identified.

The study also identifies genes like WRN (MIM 604611) [69] and BLM (MIM 604610) [70] that encode RecQ helicases which cause progeroid disorders such as Werner syndrome [71] and Bloom syndrome [72], respectively. DBC1 (MIM 602865) in the chromosome 9 linkage peak directly interacts with SIRT1 (MIM 604479) and inhibits its activity [73]. SIRT1 is activated by resveratrol [74] and has been implicated in several age-related phenotypes in mammals [75]. The sirtuin family members are key regulators of lifespan in yeast [76], worms [77], and flies [78] and mediate the effects of caloric restriction [79,80]. Caloric restriction is known to increase lifespan in a wide variety of organisms, including mammals [81]. FOXO3 [82], in which variants have been reproducibly associated with human longevity [1318], stimulates SIRT1 in response to nutrient withdrawal. 

The study also identifies different SNPs in or near TLR4 (MIM 603030) in the chromosome 9 linkage peak that have been associated with exceptional longevity in men [83,84], bone-related proxy for biological age [85], and various age-related diseases [86]. Mutations in ANK2 (MIM 106410), which is within the previously reported chromosome 4 linkage peak, cause long-QT syndrome [87]. Common variation in ANK2 has been reported to regulate the QT interval [88]. QT interval prolongation is a risk factor for sudden cardiac death in healthy individuals [89] as well as those with ischemic heart disease [90] and chronic congestive heart failure [91], which are more common causes of death among centenarians than younger individuals [92]. Heterozygous Ank2+/2 knockout mice displayed multiple signs of premature senescence, and their lifespan was significantly reduced compared to wild-type littermates [93]. The study also reports a nominally significant association between a SNP in ALPK1 (MIM 607347) and both age at death and morbidity-free status at age 65 [85].

The study suggests that case-control studies can benefit from direction or corroboration by linkage scans since cross-sectional study designs for longevity are subject to unique methodological complications [11], and longitudinal cohort designs can be prohibitively expensive. The study also suggests that the results could help inform deep resequencing efforts to identify rare variants that influence lifespan. Discovery and confirmation of human longevity genes will provide insight into the biology of aging and the genetic basis for resistance to age-related disease.

The study provides subject characteristics by age category for four subgroups, plus parametric analysis settings. Age, gender, and sibship composition statistics for the Previous, New, MC, and FO subgroups, plus parametric linkage parameters for all groups, are given across ten categories defined by gender-specific minimum requirements for expected age at death. The designations 2-ship, 3-ship, 4-ship, and 5-ship refer to sibships with two, three, four, or five siblings, respectively.

The authors thank Stephanie Brewster, Stevan Obradovic, Stacy Andersen, and Thomas Perls for providing DNA samples and phenotype information. They also thank Eric Boyden, Lynn Boyden, and Karen Mowrer for helpful discussions and critical reading of the manuscript. The study was conceived and designed by SEB LMK. SEB performed the experiments and analyzed the data. SEB LMK wrote the paper.

The study makes an important contribution to the analysis of both linkage and association studies on exceptional longevity. However, further research is needed to identify rare variants that influence lifespan since multiple variants exert individual effects too weak to be detected by association methods.This text appears to be a list of scientific articles discussing various aspects of genetics and longevity. As such, there are no clear errors or corrections to be made. However, the formatting and readability could be improved by separating each article into its own line and providing additional context or information about the content of each article.Kok FJ, Vandenbroucke JP, et al. (1994) QT interval prolongation predicts cardiovascular mortality in apparently healthy population. Circulation. Puddu PE, Bourassa MG (1991) Prediction of sudden death from QTc prolongation in patients with chronic ischemic heart disease. J Electrocardiol. Barr CS, Naas A, Freeman M, Lang CC, Struthers AD (1994) QT and sudden unexpected death in chronic heart failure. Lancet. Gessert CE, Elliott BA, Haller IV (1997) Dying of old age: an examination of death certificates of Minnesota centenarians. J Am Geriatr Soc. Mohler PJ, Healy JA, Xue H, Puca AA, Kline CF, et al. (2007) Proarrhythmic consequences of a KCNQ1 AKAP complex mutation causing long-QT syndrome: enhanced cardiac repolarization currents and premature death. PLoS One. Kruglyak L, Lander ES (1995) High-resolution genetic mapping of complex traits. Am J Hum Genet. Franceschi C, Bezrukov V, Blanche H, Bolund L, Christensen K, et al. (2007) Genetics of healthy aging in Europe: the EU-integrated project GEHA (Genetics of Healthy Aging). Ann N Y Acad Sci. Roeder K, Bacanu SA, Wasserman L, Devlin B (2006) Using linkage genome scans to improve power of association in genome scans. Am J Hum Genet 78: 243-252.