The text seems to be an academic article discussing the role of the pyrin M694V (A2080G) allele in acute myocardial infarction and longevity. Here's the processed text:

Role of the pyrin M694V (A2080G) allele in acute myocardial infarction and longevity: a study in the Sicilian population.

Maria Paola Grimaldi,* Giuseppina Candore,* Sonya Vasto,* Marco Caruso, Gregorio Enrico Hoffmann, Giuseppina Colonna-Romano,* Domenico Lio,* Yael Shinar, Claudio Franceschi, and Calogero Caruso*,1 *Gruppo di Studio sullImmunosenescenza, Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Metodologie Biomediche, and Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Malattie Cardiovascolari e Nefrourologiche, Universita` di Palermo, Italy; Heller Institute of Medical Research, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel; and Dipartimento di Sperimentale and Centro Interdipartimentale L. Galvani, Universita` di Bologna, and Istituto Nazionale di  gevity [14]. The Mediterranean fever gene MEFV is highly polymorphic among the Mediterranean populations and is proposed to play an important role in controlling the leukocyte-related inflammatory responses and apoptosis [58]. The MEFV gene encodes for pyrin, a basic protein of 781 amino acids, expressed in the cytosol of neutrophils, eosinophils, and activated monocytes. Although its exact mode of function is not known, its N-terminal, similar in secondary structure to the death protein domains, is capable of binding to key molecules in inflammatory gene transcription and cytokine secretion [8]. Proinflammatory activators up-regulate leukocyte MEFV message levels, whereas anti-inflammatory cytokines down-regulate them [9-11]. So far, the role of MEFV in cardiovascular diseases has not been formally demonstrated (see below), and its effect on longevity has not yet been studied. 

To evaluate whether inflammatory alleles of pyrin, the gene responsible for familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), may play an opposite role in CHD and in longevity, we examined three FMF-associated mutations, M694V (A2080G), M694I (G2082A), and V726A (T2177C), encoded by the FMF gene (MEFV) in 121 patients affected by acute myocardial infarction (AMI), in 68 centenarians, and in 196 age-matched controls from Sicily. None of the Sicilian subjects studied carried the V726A and the M694I FMF-related mutations. The proinflammatory M694V (A2080G) mutation was the only one we found which was over-represented significantly in CHD patients and under-represented in oldest old, and intermediate values were in healthy young controls. After adjustment for well-recognized AMI risk factors, the M694V allele still predicted a significant risk to develop AMI. So, according to these results, we suggest that carrying the proinflammatory M694V pyrin allele may increase the risk to develop AMI. Conversely, the wild-type pyrin genotype may predispose to a greater chance to live longer in a modern environment with reduced pathogen load and improved control of severe infections by antibiotics. All these data indicate a strong relationship among inflammation, genetics, CHD, and longevity. J. Leukoc. Biol. 79: 611-615; 2006.

The most prevalent mutations in the MEFV gene are ancient founder mutations, which are associated with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) [6, 8]. The disease is an autosomal, recessive, inflammatory disorder, characterized by fever attacks combined with abdominal, chest, or joint pain, erysipelas-like erythema, and infiltration of affected tissues by large numbers of neutrophils [9]. FMF is an ethnically restricted genetic disease, found commonly among Mediterranean populations such as Jews, Turks, Arabs, and Armenians. However, in the course of time, as a result of several migrations, the Mediterranean MEFV alleles reached Western Europe, spreading throughout Italy, France, and Spain. Further, FMF is also found in Ashkenazi Jews (Eastern European origin), although less frequently [12, 13].

Langevitz et al. [26] also reported on a higher prevalence of CHD in families of FMF patients than in controls (their spouses). Yet this observation was not attributed to the high probability of mutation carriers among these family members, and therefore their genotype was not pursued.

Blood specimens were collected in tripotassium EDTA sterile tubes, DNA-extractedProtocols [27] were followed, and random samples were genotyped using restriction enzyme site analysis at the Heller Institute, Sheba Medical Center (Tel Hashomer, Israel), to confirm the results [20]. Allele and genotypic frequencies were evaluated by gene count, and differences in frequency among the groups were assessed. The chi-square test (2x2 and 3x2 tables, where appropriate) and odds ratio (OR) with a confidence interval (CI) were calculated. The data were tested for goodness of fit between the observed and expected genotype frequencies according to the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) by chi-square test. In male patients and controls, we performed a logistic regression analysis to test the association of genotypes with AMI after adjusting for smoking habits, family history of CHD, and the presence of Type 2 diabetes, obesity, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertriglyceridemia. The OR (with CI) was calculated as the exponential of the regression coefficient and its standard error. We studied three MEFV mutations commonly seen in the Mediterranean area, M694V, M694I, and V726A [19, 20], in patients affected by AMI and age-matched controls from Sicily. First, to improve the power of our study, we selected genetically loaded cases having early AMI onset (<46 years) [21]. Second, we studied a third group of subjects consisting of a cohort of Sicilian centenarians. In our previous studies, we demonstrated that achievement of longevity is facilitated by an anti-inflammatory status [22-25], and centenarians are a suitable control group for complex, age-related inflammatory diseases such as coronary heart disease (CHD) [14].

RESULTS

None of the Sicilian subjects carried the M694I or V726A mutations. The proinflammatory M694V mutation, however, was present in all three cohorts of study. It was most frequent in AMI patients (12%), intermediate in healthy young controls (6%), and less frequent in centenarians (4%; Table 2, P<0.0033). All genotypes were in HWE. As expected from the HWE of M694V genotypes, all subjects with the M694V mutation were heterozygous. The heterozygous genotype was also significantly overexpressed in AMI patients (30/121) and underexpressed in centenarians (5/68) compared with young controls (121/196; Table 3, P<0.0019).

By performing a series of 2x2 separate comparisons, high significance for the different frequencies of M694V genotypes and alleles was obtained between AMI patients and age-matched and centenarian controls. The frequency of M694V proinflammatory genotype and allele in centenarians was lower (but not significantly) than that observed in young healthy controls. Finally, we performed a logistic regression analysis to test the association of genotypes with AMI after adjusting for smoking habits, family history of CHD, and the presence of Type 2 diabetes, obesity, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertriglyceridemia. As a result of the different number of women in the groups under study, logistic regression was performed only in men. Taking into account the risk factors, significant differences in genotype frequency persisted between male AMI patients and male young controls and between male AMI patients and male centenarians (Table 4). These results indicate that the M694V genotype is an independent risk factor for developing AMI in the Sicilian population.

DISCUSSION

The role of inflammatory responses in mediating all stages of atherosclerosis and CHD has been well established. Atherosclerosis begins as a focal process at specific regions of the vasculature, so-called lesion-prone areas, where hemodynamic flow is altered. The arterial endothelium expresses numerous adhesion molecules. The specific up-regulation of adhesion molecules suggests that they may regulate leukocyte adhesion in early atherogenesis. Moreover, adhesion molecules on the leukocyte membrane are increased in patients with AMI with respect to control subjects, causing the recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes to the involved myocardial region [28-30].

From literature, several case-control studies show that MEFV mutations do not seem to predispose toward inflammatory diseases such as Crohn's disease, multiple sclerosis, or rheumatoid arthritis. However, patients having that inflammatory burden and at the same time carrying one MEFV mutation appear to be highly susceptible to developing a more severe disease [17, 32, 33]. Therefore, it may be possible that MEFV mutations are not increasing the susceptibility to developing atherosclerosis, but they might affect its severity and complications, enhancing AMI occurrence.

Taking into account that several mechanisms have beenThe apoptosis pathway may account for the association with inflammation and AMI. However, it should be noted that there are currently no reports showing the association between MEFV mutations and CHD, only studies regarding the absence of disease in FMF patients treated with colchicine [26] (see also Introduction). Inflammatory pathways have been studied extensively [1-4]. The MEFV gene is expressed in early leukocyte development and is regulated in response to inflammatory mediators [5]. The familial Mediterranean fever protein, pyrin, associates with microtubules and colocalizes with actin filaments [6]. Familial Mediterranean fever is not a rare disease in Italy [7] and the spectrum of FMF mutations has been studied [8]. Furthermore, studies have been conducted on the mutation and haplotype of familial Mediterranean fever which have revealed new ancestral relationships and evidence for a high carrier frequency with reduced penetrance in the Ashkenazi Jewish population [9-11]. Common mutations in the familial Mediterranean fever gene associate with rapid progression to disability in non-Ashkenazi Jewish multiple sclerosis patients [12]. Acute phase response and evolution of familial Mediterranean fever have also been studied [13-15]. The three most common MEFV mutations have been analyzed in patients with familial Mediterranean fever [16] and genotype-phenotype assessment of common genotypes among patients with familial Mediterranean fever has also been conducted [17]. Moreover, genetic susceptibility to death from coronary heart disease has been studied in a twin study [18]. A gender-dependent genetic predisposition to produce high levels of IL-1β is detrimental for longevity [19]. Allele frequencies of T>A single nucleotide polymorphism at the first intron of interferon-γ gene in a group of Italian centenarians have also been studied [20]. An association between IL-1β promoter polymorphism and longevity has been reported [21], as well as further studies on the protective effects in men of IL-1β promoter SNP and its interaction with TNF-α promoter SNP [22]. Prevalence of ischemic heart disease in patients with familial Mediterranean fever has been studied [23] and genotype-phenotype correlation in a large group of Turkish patients with familial Mediterranean fever has been demonstrated [24]. In conclusion, the present results add another piece of evidence to our hypothesis that people genetically predisposed to a weak inflammatory activity have less chance to develop CHD and therefore, a greater chance to live longer in a modern environment with reduced pathogen load and improved control of severe infections by antibiotics [14, 22-25, 31, 36]. In any case, all these data point out the strong relationship among inflammation, genetics, CHD, and longevity. Finally, our comparison with centenarians may help to elucidate the role of genetics in age-associated inflammatory diseases characterized by a multifactorial etiology. This work was supported by grants from the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research to G. Candore, D. L., G. C-R., and C. C. Funds from Italian Ministry of Health (genetic and nongenetic factors of health in elderly) to C. F. and G. C-R. are also acknowledged. M. P. G. and S. V. are Ph.D. students of the Pathobiology Ph.D. course (directed by C. C.) of Palermo University, and this work is in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the Ph.D. Statistical advice from Prof. C. Camma` is acknowledged.

REFERENCES

1. Drenth JP, van der Meer JW: Hereditary periodic fever. N Engl J Med 2001;345:1748-1757.
2. Centola M, Wood G, Frucht DM et al.: The gene for familial Mediterranean fever, MEFV, is expressed in early leukocyte development and is regulated in response to inflammatory mediators. Blood 2000;95:3223-3231.
3. Mansfield E, Chae JJ, Komarow HD et al.: The familial Mediterranean fever protein, pyrin, associates with microtubules and colocalizes with actin filaments. Blood 2001;98:851-859.
4. Ben-Chetrit E, Levy M: Familial Mediterranean fever. Lancet 1998;351:659-664.
5. La Regina M, Nucera G, Diaco M et al.: Familial Mediterranean fever is no longer a rare disease in Italy. Eur J Hum Genet 2003;11:50-56.
6. Touitou I: The spectrum of familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) mutations. Eur J Hum Genet 2001;9:473-483.
7. Samuels J, Aksentijevich I, Torosyan Y et al.: Familial Mediterranean fever at the millennium.Against cardiovascular diseases, the International Congress of Immunology was held in Montreal, Canada. "A candidate gene for familial Mediterranean fever" was published by the French FMF Consortium in Nat. Genet. Ancient missense mutations in a new member of the Ret gene family are likely to cause familial Mediterranean fever, as stated by The International FMF Consortium in Cell. Mermott, M.F. wrote "Genetic clues to understanding periodic fevers, and possible therapies" in Trends Mol. Med. Severe disease in rheumatoid arthritis patients carrying a mutation in the Mediterranean fever gene was reported by Rabinovich, E., Livneh, A., Langevitz, P., Brezniak, N., Shinar, E., Pras, M., Shinar, Y. in Ann. Rheum. Dis. The Pyrin connection: novel players in innate immunity and inflammation were discussed by Stehlik, C., Reed, J.C. in J. Exp. Med. Targeted disruption of pyrin, the FMF protein, was found to cause heightened sensitivity to endotoxin and a defect in macrophage apoptosis by Chae, J.J., Komarow, H.D., Cheng, J. in Mol. Cell. Innate immunity and inflammation in aging: a key for understanding age-related diseases were reviewed by Licastro, F., Candore, G., Lio, D., Porcellini, E., Colonna-Romano, G., Franceschi, C., Caruso, C. in Immun. Ageing. Leukocytes and coronary heart disease were researched by Hoffman, M., Blum, A., Baruch, R., Kaplan, E., Benjamin, M. in Atherosclerosis. Inflammation, atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease were discussed by Hansson G. in N. Engl. J. Med. Cytokine gene polymorphisms and atherosclerosis were addressed in "Cytokine Gene Polymorphisms in Multifactorial Conditions" (K. Vandenbroeck, ed.), Boca Raton, FL, CRC, in press by Candore, G., Vasto, S., Colonna-Romano, G., Lio, D., Caruso, M., Rea, I.M., Caruso, C. Finally, Fidder, H., Chowers, Y., Ackerman, Z., Crusius, J.B., Livneh, A., Bar-Meir, S., Avidan, B., Shinhar Y. reported that the familial Mediterranean fever (MEVF) gene can modify Crohn's disease in Am. J. Gastroenterol.