Of the ER22/23EK polymorphism in the Glucocorticoid Receptor Gene with Survival and C-Reactive Protein Levels in Elderly Men

Elisabeth F. C. van Rossum, MD, Richard A. Feelders, MD, PhD, Annewieke W. van den Beld, MD, PhD, Andre G. Uitterlinden, PhD, Joop A. M. J. L. Janssen, MD, PhD, Wietske Ester, MD, Albert O. Brinkmann, Diederick E. Grobbee, PhD, Frank H. de Jong, PhD, Huibert A. P. Pols, MD, Jan W. Koper, PhD, Steven W. J. Lamberts, MD, PhD

Interleukin 6 was determined by a commercially available immulite assay.

PURPOSE: We recently demonstrated that a polymorphism in codons 22 and 23 of the glucocorticoid receptor gene is associated with relative glucocorticoid resistance, greater insulin sensitivity and lower total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels. In the present study, we investigated whether the ER22/23EK polymorphism is associated with survival, cholesterol levels and two predictors of mortality: serum C-reactive protein and interleukin 6 levels.

METHODS: We studied 402 men (mean [SD] age 77.8)

RESULTS: After a follow-up of 4 years, 73 (19%) of 381 non-carriers died while none of the 21 ER22/23EK carriers had died (P = 0.03). C-reactive protein levels were about 50% lower in ER22/23EK carriers (P = 0.01). There were no differences in interleukin 6 levels.

CONCLUSION: Carriers of the ER22/23EK polymorphism have better survival than non-carriers, as well as lower C-reactive protein levels. Am J Med. 2004;117:158-162. 2004 by Elsevier Inc.

METHODS: We studied 402 men (mean [SD] age 77.8) using a latex-enhanced immunoephelometric method, and a commercially available immulite assay to determine the levels of C-reactive protein and interleukin 6. The ER22/23EK variant in codons 22 and 23 of the glucocorticoid receptor gene (GAGAGG [GluArg, or ER] 3 GAAAAG [GluLys, or EK]) is associated with relative glucocorticoid resistance (2). This ER22/23EK variant was also associated with greater insulin sensitivity and lower total and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels. Furthermore, we found that the number of ER22/23EK carriers was significantly higher in the older half of the sample, suggesting that the polymorphism had a beneficial effect on survival.

SUBJECTS: We recruited 402 men aged 73 years or older by a letter sent to the oldest men in Zoetermeer, The Netherlands. Subjects were eligible to participate if they were physically and mentally able to visit the study center independently. No additional health-related criteria were used. Medications taken for more than 6 months were recorded. Data on vital status of the participants and causes of death during a 4-year follow-up were obtained by contacting the participants' general practitioners. Before the start of the study, which received approval from the Medical Ethics Committee of the Erasmus Medical Center, all subjects had given their written informed consent to participate.

MEASUREMENTS: Weight and height were measured, and body mass index (kg/m2) was calculated. Blood pressure was measured in the sitting position at the right upper arm with a random-zero sphygmomanometer. Total fat mass, trunk fat mass, and lean body mass were measured using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (Lunar Corp., Madison, Wisconsin) (12). Quality assurance, including calibration, was performed every morning using the standard provided by the manufacturer.

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: Data were analyzed using SPSS for Windows, release 10.1 (SPSS, Chicago, Illinois). Differences between the ER22/23EK carriers and the non-carriers were adjusted for age and, if necessary, for body mass index or smoking and tested by analysis of covariance using the general linear model procedure. Bonferroni post hoc tests were used to adjust for multiple comparisons. If dependent variables were not normally distributed, logarithmic transformations were applied to normalize them or nonparametric tests (Mann-Whitney U test) were used. Continuous variables are reported as mean [SD] or median (interquartile range). Survival was analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier procedure and log-rank test. To studyActivities of daily life: 9 points (812), 9 points (811)
Physical performance: 9 points (710), 9 points (711)
Number of chronic diseases: 3 (15), 3 (15)

All parameters were adjusted for age. C-reactive protein and interleukin 6 values were logarithmically transformed for statistical analysis. Lean mass and fat mass were adjusted for height. Blood pressure and lipids were adjusted for body mass index. To convert total, HDL, and LDL cholesterol levels from mmol/L to mg/dL, multiply by 38.67. To convert triglyceride levels, multiply by 89.15. To convert C-reactive protein levels from mg/L to mg/dL, divide by 10. HDL: high-density lipoprotein; LDL: low-density lipoprotein.

The ER22/23EK carriers have lower fasting insulin and cholesterol levels due to the effects of glucocorticoids. Perhaps the lower C-reactive protein levels observed in ER22/23EK carriers are related to, and possibly even due to, having less atherosclerosis. No differences in body mass index, blood pressure, or levels of HDL cholesterol, triglycerides, or interleukin 6 were found between ER22/23EK carriers and noncarriers.

Greater body mass index, particularly fat mass, is related to higher levels of interleukin 6 and C-reactive protein. In these elderly men, we found that C-reactive protein level correlated positively with body mass index and fat mass, but there was no association between interleukin 6 and these parameters. No differences in body mass index or fat mass were observed by genotype.

ER22/23EK carriers had slightly (but not significantly) higher lean body mass. A greater lean body mass, which might also result in greater insulin sensitivity, may be a factor in the better cardiovascular health status of ER22/23EK carriers, thereby contributing to lower C-reactive protein levels. In another study, we found associations of the ER22/23EK polymorphism with body composition in young adults, specifically in male carriers aged 36 years with an average of 5 kg more lean mass and in female carriers with tendencies towards less fat mass. Muscle mass is an important determinant of insulin sensitivity and can thus contribute to a better metabolic profile. We believe that body composition could play an important role in the relation of the ER22/23EK polymorphism with both survival and C-reactive protein levels.

In this population-based study involving elderly men, we found that carriers of the ER22/23EK polymorphism of the glucocorticoid receptor gene had better 4-year survival. This is in line with our previous findings (2), in which we observed that the proportion of ER22/23EK carriers was significantly greater in the older half of the study sample. The ER22/23EK carriers also had significantly lower C-reactive protein levels, but no association was found with anthropometric parameters or interleukin 6 levels. Since C-reactive protein level predicts total and cardiovascular mortality in the elderly (16), it might underlie the effect of the ER22/23EK polymorphism on survival. However, it is unclear whether C-reactive protein is a cause of atherosclerosis or whether it reflects the degree of vascular damage (17).

We previously demonstrated that carriers of the ER22/23EK polymorphism are relatively resistant to the effects of glucocorticoids, as manifest by a decreased response to the dexamethasone suppression test (2). These data suggest that there may be beneficial metabolic effects resulting in better survival due to subtle lifelong glucocorticoid resistance. In the present study, we found that the ER22/23EK polymorphism of the glucocorticoid receptor gene was associated with lower C-reactive protein levels and better survival in elderly men.

Figure. Kaplan-Meier survival curves by glucocorticoid receptor genotype. ER22/23EK carriers had significantly better survival than noncarriers. The solid line denotes noncarriers; the dotted line denotes ER22/23EK carriers.

REFERENCES:
1. Baxter JD, Rousseau GG. Glucocorticoid hormone action: an overview. Monogr Endocrinol. 1988;13:1-20.
2. van Rossum EF, Koper JW, Huizenga NA, et al. A polymorphism in the glucocorticoid receptor gene, which decreases sensitivity to glucocorticoids in vivo, is associated with low insulin and cholesterol levels. Diabetes. 2002;51:3128-3134.
3. Harris TB, Ferrucci L, Tracy RP, et al. Associations of elevated interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein levels with mortality in the elderly. Am J Med. 1999;106:506-512.
4. Ridker PMBetween five polymorphisms in the human glucocorticoid receptor gene and glucocorticoid resistance. Hum Genet. ;  :

Strandberg TE, Tilvis RS. C-reactive protein, cardiovascular risk factors, and mortality in a prospective study in the elderly. Arteriosclerosis Thrombosis and Vascular Biology. ;  :

Rattazzi M, Puato M, Faggin E, et al. C-reactive protein and interleukin in vascular disease: culprits or passive bystanders? Journal of Hypertension. ;  :

Frohlich M, Imhof A, Berg G, et al. Association between C-reactive protein and features of the metabolic syndrome: a population-based study. Diabetes Care. ;  :