Contents lists are available at the ScienceDirect Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/archger = ARCHIVES OF GERONTOLOGY        Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/archger  Distributions of interleukin-6 (IL-6) promoter and metallothionein 2A (MT2A) core promoter region gene polymorphisms and their associations with aging in the Turkish population  Zeliha Kayaalt a,*, Levent Sahiner b, M. Emre Durakoglugil b, Tulin Soylemezoglu a  a Ankara University Institute of Forensic Sciences, Mamak Street, No:10, 06590, Dikimevi, Ankara, Turkey b Ankara Oncology Education and Research Hospital, Vatan Street, 06200, Yenimahalle, Ankara, Turkey  A B S T R A C T  Aging is determined by an interaction among genetic, environmental and lifestyle factors. As interleukin-6 (IL-6) and metallothioneins (MTs) are related to inflammation and oxidative stress response, their genes are appropriate candidates for aging, age-related diseases and infections. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between the IL-6 (174 G/C) promoter region and MT2A (5 A/G) core promoter region single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with longevity in the Turkish population. Blood samples were collected from 354 individuals between 18 and 95 years of age. Individuals were classified into four groups according to their ages as 20-40, 41-60, 61-80, >80. IL-6 and MT2A polymorphisms were genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. The mean ages of individuals with IL-6 174 C carriers and C+ carriers were 49.82 ± 20.45 years and 59.82 ± 16.82 years, respectively. For the MT2A polymorphism, mean ages were estimated as 56.18 ± 19.50 years for G carriers and 47.59 ± 13.45 years for G+ carriers. As a result, when the IL-6 and MT2A polymorphisms were compared with the mean ages and age groups, statistically significant associations were found (p < 0.001 and p < 0.05, respectively). In conclusion, these data support that the IL-6 174 C+ carriers and MT2A 5 G carriers may be more advantageous for longevity. 1. Introduction Polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified (The National Center for Biotechnology Information; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/). IL-6 gene polymorphisms affect the rate of synthesis or degradation of IL-6. One of these polymorphisms in the IL-6 gene is the 174 G/C promoter region SNP and a significant association between the 174 G/C polymorphism and some age-related diseases and longevity has been shown (Caruso et al., 2004; Van Bodegom et al., 2007). Aging is determined by a complex interaction of genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors, but a strong genetic component appears to have an impact on survival to extreme ages (Perls and Terry, 2003). Longevity is likely to be influenced by thousands of genes (Franceschi et al., 2000), and twin studies have indicated that approximately 20-30% of the overall variation in lifespan can be attributed to genetic factors (Hjelmborg et al., 2006). Inflammation and dysregulated production of inflammatory cytokines have an important role in the process of aging, as they affect an individual's capacity to counteract noxious events such as pathogen infection, neurodegenerative disorders, autoimmunity and cancer (Caruso et al., 2004; Van Bodegom et al., 2007). An acute inflammatory response is beneficial for survival, but a chronic inflammatory state contributes to age-associated diseases. A reliable marker of inflammation is interleukin-6 (IL-6), the circulating level of which is increased in chronic diseases and aging (Jylha et al., 2007). The IL-6 gene is highly polymorphic. The IL-6 gene, which is located on chromosome 7p21, is expressed in lymphocytes, fibroblasts, macrophages in response to different types of inflammatory stimuli (Berghe et al., 2000). IL-6 also controls induction and expression of metallothioneins (MTs) which maintain homeostasis of zinc and copper (Mazzatti et al., 2008). During stressStating themselves as Turkish, the participants of the study were included after approval from the institutional ethics committee (approval No: 92; 25.12.2008) according to the principles of The Declaration of Helsinki. Blood samples were stored at 4°C during active use. Statistical analysis was performed using the statistical package for social sciences (SPSS) 16.0 package program. Genomic DNAs were extracted from 100 ml whole blood samples with Qiagen QIAamp DNA Mini Kit, following the manufacturer's recommended method. Polymorphism analysis of IL-6 (cid:2)174 G/C was determined using a method based on Mazzatti et al. (2008) with slight modification, and MT2A (cid:2)5 A/G was carried out following the method described by Kayaalti and Soylemezoglu (2010). In order to screen for (cid:2)174 G/C SNP in the promoter region of IL-6 gene, a 303 bp fragment containing the promoter region was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the following primers: forward 50-TTG TCA AGA CAT GCC AAA GTG CT-30.

A representative agarose gel image of digested and undigested PCR products with BsgI for MT2A polymorphism is shown in Fig. 2. The distribution of IL-6 and MT2A genotypes and ages is presented in Table 1. The distribution of the IL-6 and MT2A genotypes according to age groups is shown in Table 2.

Frequencies of MT2A and IL-6 alleles and genotypes were obtained by direct count, and the departure from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was evaluated using the Haldane exact test. Students t-test and one-way ANOVA analysis were used to compare metric variables, while categorical variables were compared using the x2 test. A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

In this study, IL-6 and MT2A polymorphisms in a sample of 354 healthy Turkish subjects were compared according to their ages, age groups, and genders. The genotype frequencies of IL-6 (cid:2)174 G/C and MT2A (cid:2)5 A/G polymorphisms in all samples were consistent with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Volunteers were subdivided into four groups according to their ages as 2040 years, 4160 years, 6180 years, and >80 years. Genotype frequencies of IL-6 and MT2A polymorphisms in male and female subjects were compared with the x2-test, and no significant difference was found between the two genders.

The genotype frequencies of the IL-6 (cid:2)174 G/C promoter region SNP were determined to be as follows: 44.6% homozygote typical (GG), 46.9% heterozygote (GC), and 8.5% homozygote atypical genotype (CC). The mean ages of individuals with homozygote typical, heterozygote, and homozygote atypical genotype were 49.82 ± 20.45 years, 58.57 ± 17.02 years, and 66.73 ± 14.00 years, respectively. A highly statistically significant association was detected between IL-6 genotype and allele frequencies in aging.

In addition, the frequency of the IL-6 (cid:2)174 C+ carriers in the age groups of 4160 years, 6180 years, and >80 years was higher than that in the age group of 2040 years.

There was a significant association between (cid:2)174 G/C promoter region polymorphism and MT2A (cid:2)5 A/G promoter region polymorphism with longevity in Turkish individuals. IL-6 is a key proinflammatory cytokine and (cid:2)174 G/C SNP polymorphism located within the promoter regions of IL-6 gene, determining increased or decreased production of inflammatory cytokines has been reported. Results of case-control and prospective studies in associations with the IL-6 (cid:2)174 G/C promoter region polymorphism and successful aging have been very conflicting. 

This study was partly supported by The Scientific and Technical Council of Turkey (TUBITAK; Project No: 109S248, 2010).In an Italian elderly population (The Treviso Longeva-Trelong study), an increase in interleukin-6 plasma levels with age was observed, with a sex-specific contribution of rs1800795 polymorphism (Albani et al., 2009). Nevertheless, several studies have reported a positive association between the IL-6 (cid:2)174 G/C polymorphism and longevity, and the ability to produce low levels of IL-6 throughout the lifespan seems to be beneficial for longevity (Bonafe` et al., 2001; Christiansen et al., 2004; Franceschi et al., 2005). MT gene expression is induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines during stress and inflammation. The interrelationships among inflammatory cytokines, stress, MT expression level, and zinc ion bioavailability are crucial to achieving healthy longevity (Mocchegiani and Malavolta, 2008). The analysis of some polymorphisms in MT genes confirms this assumption. The studies performed so far regarding the relationship between several MT polymorphisms and aging and age-related disease have usually been conducted in the Italian population by the same research group. Recent findings have shown that MT1A +647 A/C coding region polymorphism affects the inflammatory status, and this polymorphism is associated with longevity in the Italian population (Cipriano et al., 2006). Also, MT1A +647 C+ carriers displayed higher IL-6 levels, and they were more likely to develop type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular complications. However, in the same study, concerning +1245 A/G MT1A polymorphism, no differences in genotypic and allelic distribution were found among healthy old control groups (Giacconi et al., 2008). In another polymorphism at the untranslated region of MT2A (+838 C/G), it is observed that elderly subjects carrying C(cid:2) allele had a higher risk of developing carotid artery stenosis (Giacconi et al., 2007). Giacconi et al. (2008) reported a significant relationship between MT2A (cid:2)209 A/G promoter region polymorphism, diabetes type II, and atherosclerosis disease. Moreover, they found out that G(cid:2) carriers display higher circulating IL-6 levels compared to G+. Another polymorphism regarding MT2A is (cid:2)5 A/G SNP, and this polymorphism is located at the core promoter region of the MT2A gene where gene transcription initializes. There have been only a few studies on MT2A (cid:2)5 A/G SNP in the literature, and a significant association has been found between this polymorphism and Cd levels in autopsy renal tissues (Kayaalti et al., 2010), whereas no other association with longevity or age-related diseases was observed.disease. Pl. Med.

Mazzatti, D.J., Malavolta, M., White, A.J., Costarelli, L., Giacconi, R., Muti, E., Cipriano, C., Powell, J.R., Mocchegiani, E. Effects of interleukin-6 (IL-6) C/G and metallothionein A + A/C single-nucleotide polymorphisms on zinc-regulated gene expression in aging. Exp. Gerontol.

Miles, A.T., Hawksworth, G.M., Beattie, J.H., Rodilla, V. Induction, regulation, degradation and biological significance of mammalian metallothioneins. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol.

Mocchegiani, E., Malavolta, M. Zinc-gene interaction related to inflammatory/immune response in aging. Genes Nutr.

Mocchegiani, E., Giacconi, R., Muti, E., Rogo, C., Bracci, M., Muzzioli, M., Cipriano, C., Malavolta, M. Zinc, immune plasticity, aging and successful aging: role of metallothionein. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.

Mocchegiani, E., Giacconi, R., Cipriano, C., Malavolta, M. NK and NKT cells in aging and longevity: role of zinc and metallothioneins. J. Clin. Immunol.

Neal B. Quantifying the importance of interleukin-6 for coronary heart disease. Pl. Med.

Perls T., Terry D. Understanding the determinants of exceptional longevity. Ann. Intern. Med.

Pes G.M., Lio D., Carru C., Deiana L., Baggio G., Franceschi C., Ferrucci L., Oliveri F., Scola L., Crivello A., Candore G., Colonna-Romano G., Caruso C. Association between longevity and cytokine gene polymorphisms. A study in Sardinian centenarians. Aging Clin. Exp. Res.

Reiner A.P., Diehr P., Browner W.S., Humphries S.E., Jenny N.S., Cushman M., Tracy R.P., Walston J., Lumley T., Newman A.B., Kuller L.H., Psaty B.M. Common promoter polymorphisms of inflammation and thrombosis genes and longevity in older adults: the cardiovascular health study. Atherosclerosis.

Salvioli, S., Olivieri, F., Marchegiani, F., Cardelli, M., Santoro, A., Bellavista, E., Mishto, M., Invidia, L., Capri, M., Valensin, S., Sevini, F., Cevenini, E., Celani, L., Lescai, F., Gonos, E., Caruso, C., Paolisso, G., De Benedictis, G., Monti, D., Franceschi, C. Genes, aging and longevity in humans: problems, advantages and perspectives. Free Radic. Res.

Samson S.L. Gedamu L. Molecular analyses of metallothionein gene regulation. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol.

Sansoni P., Vescovini R., Fagnoni F., Biasini C., Zanni F., Zanlari L., Telera A., Lucchini G.. Passeri G.. Monti D.. Franceschi C.. Passeri M. The immune system in extreme longevity. Exp. Gerontol.

Sciavolino P.J.. Vilcek J. Regulation of metallothionein gene expression by TNF-alpha and IFN-beta in human fibroblasts. Cytokine.

Van Bodegom D., May L., Meij H.J., Westendorp R.G. Regulation of human life histories: the role of the inflammatory host response. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.

Kwon C.S., Kountouri A.M., Mayer C., Gordon M.J., Kwun I.S., Beattie J.H. Mononuclear cell metallothionein mRNA levels in human subjects with poor zinc nutrition. Br. J. Nutr. 97, 247-254.

Neal B. 2008. Quantifying the importance of interleukin-6 for coronary heart disease. Pl. Med.