American descent found that the heritability of human longevity is estimated at 20-30%, and that specific genetic variants may have non-linear effects on different human phenotypes (2,3). However, the molecular genetics of human longevity is largely unexplored in Latin America and other developing regions, despite the fact that life expectancy is increasing in these areas (6). Genetic explorations of human longevity may shed light on molecular factors associated with resistance to several common age-related diseases (1,2). 

To explore the possibility of an association between common polymorphisms in two candidate genes and longevity in Colombia, we analyzed two polymorphisms in apolipoprotein E (APOE) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) genes in a sample of 538 Colombian subjects aged 18-106 years using previously validated PCR-based methods (13,17). We found a significant decrease in ACE DD genotype (24% vs. 16%) between young and old subject groups (mean age: 45 vs. 77 years) (p=0.03). The ACE DD genotype and D allele decrease was significant only in women. There were no differences for APOE polymorphism between young and old subjects.

Our results are compatible with the expected age-related decrease of ACE DD genotype. Future studies examining functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the ACE gene and its correlation with serum ACE activity in the older subjects and their younger relatives in this sample are warranted. Because cardiovascular disease is one of the main causes of death worldwide, polymorphisms in genes involved in vascular dysfunction such as apolipoprotein E (APOE) and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) have been posited as strong candidates for longevity in different studies searching for age-related differences in the frequency of alleles and genotypes related to cardiovascular risk in Caucasian and Asian populations (2,7).Differential values of heritability were observed among Latin American populations (3). Colombia is expected to be greatly impacted by human aging; life expectancy was only 40.7 years in 1930 but is estimated to be 74 years in 2015 (6,19). The Colombian population has distinct genetic and environmental features, including a mixture of Caucasian and Native American genetic backgrounds in the population living in Bogota (20), which make an analysis of candidate genetic polymorphisms for human longevity in this population interesting. In this study, we found no significant differences in the frequency of APOE polymorphism (allele or genotype) between different age groups in a large Colombian sample (538 subjects). However, we did find a significant decrease in the frequency of the ACE DD genotype in the older group sample compared to the younger sample (24 vs. 16%), particularly among women. A lack of statistical power due to the smaller size of the subsample of men may have prevented us from detecting an association between ACE DD and longevity in male subjects. Sex-dependent genetic associations with human longevity have been reported with several polymorphisms (7). Preliminary data from an ongoing analysis of selected demographic and environmental variables for a subset of the sample of older subjects (206 individuals) showed higher values for BMI and serum total cholesterol and lower rates of smoking in women (unpublished results). Consistent with these demographic variables and a non-linear effect of specific polymorphisms on human longevity, there is a possibility that other unknown environmental and genetic variables accounted for the earlier death of men (in comparison to women) in this sample. The interaction of specific genetic variants (ACE DD genotype) with some female-specific environmental characteristics found in this population (higher serum cholesterol, for example) may account for an earlier death among ACE DD carriers and the decreased frequency of this genotype seen in older women in this study. The mean age of the older subjects (77 years) was 30 years more than the estimated life expectancy of their birth year cohort (40.7 years) (19). 

Previously, we found a highly significant association in our population between several SNPs in the APOE gene and Alzheimer's disease (16,37), but not with ACE or A2M genes (17). A future analysis in the present population of other promising candidate genes for human longevity (MTP, WRN, among others) (2,38), together with the analysis of additional SNPs in the ACE I gene having a possible functional effect (39) and analysis of ACE serum levels (26) in older subjects and their younger relatives (40), will be important. 

Although previous reports in Europe and Asia showed that there were no differences in ACE genotypes with age or a paradoxical decrease in ACE II genotype (23-33), a recent report showed a decrease of ACE DD genotype (34) (60 vs. 70 years, 45 vs. 42%) in a smaller sample of older subjects of mixed descent living in Brazil. The age-dependent decrease and negative selection of ACE DD genotype carriers is compatible with its associated risk for cardiovascular diseases in Caucasian populations (10). Results of prospective studies analyzing mortality in small time windows (2-10 years) are also inconclusive regarding effects of ACE and APOE polymorphisms (35,36).

Several previous association studies conducted in Caucasian and Asian populations have shown contradictory results regarding the role of APOE and ACE polymorphisms in human longevity. In addition to variations in genetic risks between populations, differences in the composition of younger and older subject samples (for example, presence of comorbidity) between studies may partially explain the variability in their results (2,7). A systematic review showed that the association of APOE with longevity is dependent on the frequency of APOE4 in young subjects, being lower or nonsignificant in samples with a low APOE4 frequency (21,22). These observations and the low frequency of APOE4 in our young population (9%) may explain our current findings of a lack of association with APOE4. 

Acknowledgments: This work was supported by a grant from DIB-UNAL (822002) and COLCIENCIAS (11010416404). The authors thank Dr. Jorge Lopez and members of Beneficencia of Cundinamarca for their help in recruiting older subjects.

References:

1. Evert J, Lawler E, Bogan H, Perls T. Morbidity profiles of centenarians: survivors, delayers, and escapers. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Sci 2003; 58: 232–7.
2. Perls T, Terry D. Genetics of exceptional longevity. Exp Gerontol 2003; 38: 725–30.
3. Lee JH, Flaquer A, Costa R, Andrews H, Cross P, Lantigua R, et alArboleda GH, Yunis JJ, Pardo R, Gomez CM, Hedmont D, Arango G, et al. Apolipoprotein E genotyping in a sample of Colombian patients with Alzheimer's disease. Neuroscience Letters ;  :
Camelo D, Arboleda G, Yunis JJ, Pardo R, Arango G, Solano E, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme and alpha-macroglobulin gene polymorphisms are not associated with Alzheimer's disease in Colombian patients. Journal of Neurological Sciences ;  :
Pritchard JK, Stephens M, Donnelly P. Inference of population structure using multilocus genotype data. Genetics ;  :
E.C.L.A.C. (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean). Latin America: Life Tables (available at: http://www.eclac.cl) 
Yunis JJ, Garcia O, Cuervo AG, Guio E, Pineda CR, Yunis EJ. Population data for PowerPlex in thirteen departments and the capital city of Colombia. Journal of Forensic Science ;  :
Lewis SJ, Brunner EJ. Methodological problems in genetic association studies of longevity - the apolipoprotein E gene as an example. International Journal of Epidemiology ;  :
Stessman J, Maaravi Y, Hammerman-Rozenberg R, Cohen A, Nemanov L, Gritsenko I, et al. Candidate genes associated with ageing and life expectancy in the Jerusalem longitudinal study. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development ;  :
Schachter F, Faure-Delanef L, Guenot F, Rouger H, Froguel P, Lesueur-Ginot L, et al. Genetic associations with human longevity at the APOE and ACE loci. Nature Genetics ;  :
Agerholm-Larsen B, Nordestgaard BG, Steffensen R, Sorensen TI, Jensen G, Tybjaerg-Hansen A. ACE gene polymorphism: ischemic heart disease and longevity in 9000 individuals. A case-referent and retrospective cohort study based on the Copenhagen City Heart Study. Circulation ;  :
Galinsky D, Tysoe C, Brayne CE, Easton DF, Huppert FA, Dening TR, et al. Analysis of the apoE/apoC-I, angiotensin converting enzyme and methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase genes as candidates affecting human longevity. Atherosclerosis ;  :
Faure-Delanef L, Baudin B, Beneteau-Burnat B, Beaudoin JC, Giboudeau J, Cohen D. Plasma concentration, kinetic constants, and gene polymorphism of angiotensin I-converting enzyme in centenarians. Clinical Chemistry ;  :
Bladbjerg EM, Andersen-Ranberg K, de Maat MP, Kristensen SR, Jeune B, Gram J, et al. Longevity is independent of common variations in genes associated with cardiovascular risk. Thrombosis and Haemostasis ;  :