A B C E F G P. Reiner, Paula Diehr, Warren S. Browner, Stephen E. Humphries, H I J K Nancy S. Jenny, Mary Cushman, Russell P. Tracy, Jeremy Walston, C L M L A D E Thomas Lumley, Anne B. Newman, Lewis H. Kuller, Bruce M. Psaty

16 September 2004; received in revised form 6 December 2004; accepted 10 January. Available online 19 February 2005.

Abstract:
Inflammatory response genes may influence lifespan or quality at advanced ages. Using data from the population-based cardiovascular study (CHS) cohort, we examined the associations between promoter polymorphisms of several inflammation and thrombosis genes longevity. We ascertained genotypes for interleukin (IL)-6 174 G/C, -fibrinogen 455 G/A, plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI)-1 4G/5G, and thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) 438 G/A in 2224 men and women aged 65 years at baseline. During 10 years of follow-up, men with the TAFI 438 A/A genotype had decreased mortality due to all causes and lived on average for 0.9 more years of life or 1.1 more years of healthy life than men with the 438 G allele. The effects of TAFI 438 G/A in women were smaller and not significant. PAI-1 4G/4G genotype appeared to be associated with lower non-cardiovascular mortality in men but with greater mortality in women. In exploratory analyses, we observed a possible interaction between anti-inflammatory drugs, interleukin-6 C/C genotype, and longevity. These findings suggest that modulators of fibrinolytic activity may have a generalized influence on aging and merit further investigation in studies of genetic determinants of human longevity.

Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor; Longevity; Inflammation; Fibrinolysis; Promoter polymorphism.

Genetic factors appear to influence mortality, even at advanced ages [1,2]. Inflammation, an evolutionarily conserved stress response, may reduce the length or quality of life in older adults by affecting adaptation to stressful events, chronic diseases, or the rate of aging. In case-control studies, A.P. Reiner et al. / Atherosclerosis 181 (2005) 175-183 provide complete mortality follow-up. For the current analysis, we used complete 10-year follow-up data on all participants (corresponding to June 2000 for the original CHS cohort and June 2002 for the second CHS cohort).

Of exceptional survival, inflammation and thrombosis gene promoter variants were associated with longevity, often in a sex-specific manner [3-5]. For example, the 174 C allele of interleukin-6 was more common among male but not female centenarians compared to younger sex-matched controls [4]. These retrospective studies of longevity have several limitations. The comparison group is sampled from another birth cohort whose environmental exposures may differ from the long-lived case group. In addition, observed differences in case-control genotype or allele frequency may reflect survival due to association with a single common age-related condition such as coronary heart disease, rather than any influence on the aging process per se.

Primary endpoints for this analysis included years of life as well as years of healthy life defined as the number of years the person reported being in excellent, very good or good health in the 10 years after enrollment [7,8]. This outcome was derived from standard information on self-rated health status (excellent/very good/good/fair/poor) collected at baseline and every 6 months during follow-up. Missing data were imputed by linear interpolation of the available longitudinal data recorded 6 months before and after the missing value [7,8]. For the 3% of subjects whose final 10-year follow-up measurement was still missing, we used the last observation carried forward method of imputation.

Longitudinal cohort studies may allow more accurate assessment of genetic influences on longevity because both cause-specific and overall mortality can be ascertained. We, therefore, performed an analysis of genotype data available for promoter polymorphisms of interleukin-6, -fibrinogen, PAI-1, and TAFI on a subsample of participants from the cardiovascular health study (CHS; for details see Appendix A), a U.S. cohort of white and black men and women aged 65 years and older. After 10 years of follow-up, we assessed sex-specific associations of these gene variants with outcomes that reflect overall longevity (as years of life), life span and quality of life (as years of healthy life), and all-cause and causeProportional hazards models [15]. After 10 years of follow-up, there were 918 deaths, including 451 cardiovascular deaths (303 from coronary heart disease) and 467 non-cardiovascular deaths (156 from cancer). The mean (S.D.) number of years lived per subject during those 10 years was 8.32 ± 2.69; the mean number of healthy years was 6.07 ± 3.43. Age, male sex, black race, baseline fair or poor self-reported health status, smoking, diabetes, obesity, hypertension, and a history of cardiovascular disease were strongly associated with fewer years of life and fewer years of healthy life (all P < 0.001). Subjects having the most common genotype served as the reference group, unless otherwise noted. Covariate-adjusted P-values for genetic main effects were calculated from the composite Wald test for indicator variables corresponding to the two minor genotypes. Because our primary hypotheses required performing multiple independent tests of four unlinked genes, P-values < 0.01 were considered statistically significant. Except for TAFI 438 G/A, the variant promoter alleles were less common among blacks than whites (Table 2). Genotype distributions did not differ significantly according to other baseline health-related variables such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and fair or poor health status (all P > 0.10).

In hypothesis-generating analyses, we explored the interactions of inflammatory response genotypes with three risk factors that influence inflammation: cigarette smoking, obesity (body mass index >30 kg/m2), and baseline use of any medication having anti-inflammatory properties (aspirin, NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, or statins). Models were adjusted for sex, sex-by-genotype interaction, baseline cardiovascular disease, current smoking, diabetes, and hypertension. P-values for interaction were calculated from Wald tests for the cross-product interaction terms. Because of the exploratory nature of these analyses, we set statistical significance at P < 0.05.

Among white participants, the alleles of the TAFI 438 G/A polymorphism deviated significantly from Hardy-Weinberg proportions (Table 2). The Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium was strongly present among men (P = 0.0007), but not among women (P = 0.26). When adjusted for multiple comparisons, the disequilibrium remained significant (P-values < 0.03 overall, < 0.01 in white men). Possible, but less extreme, deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were noted for the PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism.

2. Results

The mean age at study entry was 73 years, 84% of the participants were white, and 54% were women (Table 1). Demographic characteristics, overall health and functional status,

Years of life and years of healthy life differed by TAFI promoter genotypes among white men (Table 3), but there was little association of TAFI genotype with longevity in women (Table 4). The association with years of life in men remained significant in analyses that also adjusted for baseline socioeconomic (P = 0.007) or health-related variables (P = 0.003); similar results were seen for years of healthy life (P = 0.01 after adjustment for socioeconomic variables; P = 0.02 after adjustment for health-related variables). During 10 years of follow-up, men carrying the TAFI 438 A/A genotype had 0.9 additional years of life (95% CI 0.2-1.9 years) or 1.1 additional years of healthy life (95% CI 0.2-2.1 years) relative to men carrying at least one common TAFI 438 G allele.

Selected baseline characteristics of study participants

Characteristics n (%) or mean ± S.D. (range) Age, years (range) 73.4 ± 5.5 (64-94) White race 1954 (84) Female sex 1253 (54) Very good or excellent health 830 (36) Obesity a 682 (29) Current smoker 273 (12) Diabetes 727 (32) Hypertension 1097 (47) Prevalent cardiovascular disease b 727 (31) Previous diagnosis of cancer 321 (14) Anti-inflammatory medication use c 1161 (50)

Years of life and years of healthy life differed slightly, but not significantly, by PAI-1 675 4G/5G genotype among whites (Tables 3 and 4), albeit in opposite directions among men and women (interaction P = 0.10 for years of life, and P = 0.01 for years of healthy life). There was little association between the interleukin-6 or -fibrinogen promoter polymorphThis text appears to be a scientific study report featuring genetic associations with longevity and mortality in older adults. There are no obvious spelling mistakes or grammatical errors to correct, but the text is highly technical and may require domain knowledge to fully understand. As an AI language model, I do not have the necessary background knowledge to provide a summary or analysis of the study findings and their implications.Infectious diseases and other sources of inflammation may have contributed to the historical decline in old-age mortality [25]. Sex-related differences in immune function and infectious disease susceptibility may also partly explain the shorter lifespan of men compared to women [26]. In summary, a common promoter variant of the TAFI gene, and perhaps also the PAI-1 gene, may be associated with longevity in older men. These findings suggest that modulators of fibrinolytic activity or proteolysis may have a generalized influence on aging or age-related disease and merit further investigation in studies of genetic determinants of human longevity. Examination of additional TAFI gene variants, such as Thr325Ile, or multi-locus haplotypes, may be required to define more precisely the location of any functional longevity-associated allele(s). Interactions with additional lifestyle factors and interventions, as well as other gene pathways related to vascular disease and aging (oxidative and metabolic responses, insulin signaling) may also be appropriate for future study.

Our results for the PAI-1 promoter polymorphism were confusing and may just be due to chance. The 4G/4G genotype appeared to be associated with lower non-cardiovascular mortality in men but with greater cardiovascular mortality in women. Smaller population studies examining the PAI-1 promoter polymorphism have also shown conflicting results. The 4G allele was associated with increased longevity in an Italian centenarian case-control study, but gender-specific was not noted [3]. There was no association between PAI-1 genotype in Danish centenarians [27], nor in a German octogenarian cohort [28]. The PAI-1 4G/5G variant has been shown to be functional in vitro [29,30]. The 4G sequence abolishes a binding site for a transcription repressor, thereby resulting in higher promoter activity and increased plasma levels of PAI-1 in vivo. In rodent models, the induction of PAI-1 expression in response to stress and the age-related increase in magnitude of this response influences the occurrence of vascular and tissue thrombosis [31,32]. These experimental findings might explain the trend toward increased cardiovascular mortality associated with the 4G/4G genotype observed here and by others [33,34].

Acknowledgements

The research reported in this article was supported by contracts N01-HC-85079 through N01-HC-85086, N01-HC-35129, and N01-HC-15103 from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. WSB is supported by a grant from the National Institute of Health (AG 05407). SEH is supported by grants from the British Heart Foundation (RG2000/15).

Appendix A

Increased levels of plasma fibrinogen predict total mortality in CHS [35] as well as other cohort studies of older adults [36]. Nonetheless, we and others did not observe an association with longevity for the fibrinogen promoter polymorphism. The negative findings may reflect the relatively small portion of the overall variance in fibrinogen level explained by the 455 G/A polymorphism [37].

Steering committee chairman: Curt D. Furberg, MD PhD, Wake Forest University School of Medicine. NHLBI project office: Jean Olson, MD MPH. L. Burke, MD. Wake Forest University ECG Reading Center: Ronald Prineas, MD PhD. University of California, Davis: John Robbins, MD MHS. The Johns Hopkins University: Linda P. Fried, MD MPH. The Johns Hopkins University MRI Reading Center: David Yousem, MD MBA. University of Pittsburgh: Lewis H. Kuller, MD DrPH. University of California, Irvine Echocardiography Reading Center (baseline): Julius M. Gardin, MD. Georgetown Medical Center Echocardiography Reading Center (follow-up): John S. Gottdiener, MD. New England Medical Center, Boston Ultrasound Reading Center: Daniel H. OLeary, MD. University of Vermont Central Blood Analysis Laboratory: Russell P. Tracy, PhD. University of Arizona, Tucson Pulmonary Reading Center: Paul Enright, MD. Retinal Reading Center University of Wisconsin: Ronald Klein, MD. University of Washington Coordinating Center: Richard A. Kronmal, PhD.

Increased plasma IL-6 levels have been associated with age-related morbidity and all-cause mortality in older adults. In older men, the IL-6 promoter 174 G/G genotype was associated with increased IL-6 levels and decreased longevity [4,38]. Other case-control studies of long-lived individuals reported conflicting results [39,40]. Overall, we observed a non-significant trend toward increased longevity associated with the IL-6 174 C allele. The possible interaction of anti-inflammatory drugs and interleukin-6 174 C/C genotype on mortality and years of healthy life should be interpreted cautiously. These data wereElderly Japanese-American men. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol; 20: [1] de Maat MP, Bladbjerg EM, Hjelmborg JB, et al. Genetic influence on inflammation variables in the elderly. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol; 20: [2] Giacconi R, Cipriano C, Albanese F, et al. The G/C polymorphism of IL-6 is useful to screen old subjects at risk for atherosclerosis or to reach successful aging. Exp Gerontol; 39: [3] Capurso C, Solfrizzi V, D'Introno A, et al. Interleukin-6 G/C promoter gene polymorphism in centenarians: no evidence of association with human longevity or interaction with apolipoprotein E from coronary heart disease: a 10-year follow-up of Swedish twins. J Intern Med; 252: [4] Wienke A, Holm NV, Christensen K, et al. The heritability of cause-specific mortality: a correlated gamma-frailty model applied to mortality due to respiratory diseases in Danish twins born 1870-1930. Stat Med; 22: [5] Mannucci PM, Mari D, Merati G, et al. Gene polymorphisms predicting high plasma levels of coagulation and fibrinolysis proteins. A study in centenarians. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol; 19: [6] Bonafe M, Olivieri F, Cavallone L, et al. A gender-dependent genetic predisposition to produce high levels of IL-6 is detrimental for longevity. Eur J Immunol; 30: [7] Lio D, Scola L, Crivello A, et al. Allele frequencies of +874TA single nucleotide polymorphism at the first intron of interferon-gamma gene in a group of Italian centenarians. Exp Gerontol; 38: [8] Fried LP, Borhani NO, Enright P, et al. The Cardiovascular Health Study: design and rationale. Ann Epidemiol; 1: [9] Diehr P, Patrick DL, Bild DE, Burke GL, Williamson JD. Predicting future years of healthy life for older adults. J Clin Epidemiol; 51: [10] Diehr P, Newman AB, Jackson SA, Kuller L, Powe N. Weight modification trials in older adults: what should the outcome measure be? Curr Control Trials Cardiovasc Med; 1: [11] Jenny NS, Tracy RP, Ogg MS, et al. In the elderly, interleukin-6 plasma levels and the G>C polymorphism are associated with the development of cardiovascular disease. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol; 22: [12] Crainich P, Jenny NS, Tang Z, et al. Lack of association of the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 G/PAI-1 4G promoter polymorphism with cardiovascular disease in the elderly. J Thromb Haemost; 1: [13] Thomas A, Lamlum H, Humphries S, Green F. Linkage disequilibrium across the fibrinogen locus as shown by five genetic polymorphisms, G/A-455 (HaeII), C/T-854 (HinII/Alu), T/G+1689 (AviI), and Bcl (beta-fibrinogen) and TaqI (alpha-fibrinogen), and their detection by PCR. Hum Mutat; 11: [14] Crainich P, Tang Z, Macy EM, et al. A polymorphism at position -844 in the promoter region of thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) is strongly associated with plasma antigen levels in healthy older men and women. Circulation; 106:II-501 [15] Suissa S, Edwardes MD, Boivin JF. External comparisons from nested case-control designs. Epidemiology; 12: [16] Lin DY, Wei LJ. The robust inference of the Cox proportional hazards model. J Am Stat Assoc; 84: [17] Lamarca R, Alonso J, Gomez G, Munoz A. Left-truncated data with age as time scale: an alternative for survival analysis in the elderly population. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci; 56:B [January]. [18] Jackson AU, Galecki AT, Burke DT, Miller RA. Mouse loci associated with life span exhibit sex-specific and epistatic effects. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci; 54:B(5):B218-22 [19] Juhan