Contents lists are available at the SciVerse ScienceDirect Cytokine journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/issn/10434666. Although persistent inflammation has been related to unsuccessful aging, a pro-inflammatory status is a common phenotype in older individuals. To assess the genetic component of the inflammatory status in the elderly, we studied the distribution of two polymorphic chemokine pathway genes, RANTES and CCR5, in the elderly. We genotyped RANTES (cid:2)403G/A and RANTES Int1.1T/C polymorphisms and CCR5D32 polymorphism in 104 elderly individuals and 110 controls. The RANTES (cid:2)403A and RANTES Int1.1C alleles are associated with pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory status, respectively. The CCR5D32 allele abrogates functional receptor expression of the pro-inflammatory CCR5-mediated action. The prevalence of the RANTES (cid:2)403G allele, which is associated with high RANTES production in other studies, was reduced in elderly males compared to controls. In addition, the RANTES pro-inflammatory haplotype (cid:2)403A-Int1.1T was overrepresented in elderly males, while the RANTES anti-inflammatory haplotype (cid:2)403G-Int1.1C was overrepresented in elderly females. Our results suggest a sex-specific RANTES inflammatory genetic determinant that could contribute to the known sex-related differences in aging.    2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Introduction

Recruitment of leukocytes to an inflammation site is related to chemokine gene transcription and receptor expression levels due to polymorphisms at the corresponding genes that affect inflammatory response. Previous studies of chemokine factors related to age-related disease and longevity revealed attrition or change in frequency of chemokine alleles with aging. Chemokines are small chemotactic cytokines (C-C) with a pivotal role in leukocyte trafficking and activation. Their biological effects are exerted via interaction with G protein-coupled receptors that mediate intracellular signals. C-C chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5) is the co-receptor for macrophages and dual (T cell and macrophage) tropic immunodeficiency viruses and is involved in the migration of monocytes, NK cells, and Th1 cells toward an increasing concentration of b-chemokines, which results in recruitment of leukocytes to the inflammation site. Natural CCR5 ligands are the C-C motif chemokine ligands CCL3, CCL4, and CCL5, which are also known as RANTES (regulated upon activation normal T-cell expressed and secreted). Two polymorphisms have been described in the RANTES gene, a promoter polymorphism ((cid:2)403G/A, rs2107538) whose (cid:2)403A allele increases the promoter transcriptional activity, which results in high serum RANTES levels favoring a pro-inflammatory status [4], and an intronic polymorphism (Int1.1T/C, rs2280789) whose Int1.1C variant has been associated with low RANTES expression and an anti-inflammatory status [5]. A 32 bp insertion/deletion polymorphism has been described in exon 3 of the CCR5 gene (CCR5D32, rs333) that abrogates functional CCR5 receptor expression, weakening the pro-inflammatory CCR5-mediated action [6]. The CCR5D32 allele reaches appreciable frequencies only in Europe, following a latitudinal cline distribution that is higher in the north and lower in the south. Studies have demonstrated that the CCR5D32 allele is related to reduction of portal inflammation during hepatitis C (HCV) infection, delayed progression in multiple sclerosis, protection against cardiovascular diseases (acute myocardial infarction and severe coronary heart disease), and attenuation of the inflammatory response that delays progression of atherosclerotic lesions.

The immune system's positive protective effect against pathogens and the spread of tumor cells can also become a detrimental chronic inflammation affecting longevity. Studies on the genetic component of longevity have tended to evaluate the role of immune system genes, especially those involved in inflammation. Results obtained reveal that persistent activation of inflammatory status is related to unsuccessful aging and that avoiding persistent inflammation contributes to healthy aging. However, a pro-inflammatory status is a common phenotype in older people [1]. 

To assess the possibility of a genetic component of inflammatory status in the elderly, we studied the distribution of functional polymorphic variants of two genes from the chemokine inflammatory pathway, RANTES and CCR5, in long-lived individuals.

Methods

We genotyped RANTES (cid:2)403G/A and Int1.1T/C and CGenotype and allele distributions between controls and the elderly were analyzed using contingency table analysis performed by the OpenEpi web resource (http://www.openepi.com/OE2.3/Menu/OpenEpiMenu.htm). Differences were evaluated for all subjects and by sex between cohorts. For comparisons including zero values, odds ratio and 95%CI were calculated based on the Peto odds ratio method using the online calculator http://www.hut-chon.net/ConfidORnulhypo.htm. This approach has the advantage of accepting zero results without generating infinity. P values <0.05 were considered statistically significant. In addition, we used a modified Bonferroni-corrected nominal threshold of P = 0.05/N, where N is the effective number of independent marker loci after consideration of linkage disequilibrium between markers. N was calculated using the SNP (single nucleotide polymorphism) spectral decomposition approach web-based program SNPSpD (http://gump.qimr.edu.au/general/daleN/SNPSpD/). This yields an experiment-wide significance threshold of 0.02 to keep Type I error rate at 5%. 

The association of RANTES polymorphisms with longevity has not yet been described. Our results denote a sex-specific association with functional RANTES polymorphisms. Pro-inflammatory RANTES alleles/haplotypes were positively associated with elderly males. In contrast, anti-inflammatory RANTES alleles/haplotypes showed a positive association with elderly females. Elevation of circulating levels of RANTES has been described in unstable angina pectoris patients as predictive of future cardiovascular adverse events [9]. Furthermore, a significant elevation of major C-C chemokines, including RANTES, has been described during the course of acute myocardial infarction that actively contributes to the pathophysiology of the disease. Finally, association studies of functional RANTES polymorphisms have been performed highlighting the role of RANTES in age-related diseases [4].

Genotype distribution differences between the elderly and controls showed statistical significance for Int1.1T/C polymorphism (P = 0.03), but not for CCR5D32 or 403G/A polymorphisms (Table 1). Sex-based differences between cohorts for the CCR5D32 polymorphism were not significant. Nevertheless, differences between elderly and control males were observed for the 403G/A genotype (P = 0.029) and allele distribution (OR = 3.2; 95%CI = 1.28-5; P = 0.012) (Table 1). In addition, differences were observed when 403A allele was modeled as dominant (OR = 4; 95%CI = 1.41-11.8; P = 0.01). We also found a genotype association for Int1.1C allele under recessive model (Peto OR = 8.8; 95%CI = 1.74-4.7; P = 0.008) that was mainly contributed by differences between elderly and control females (Peto OR = 8.4; 95%CI = 1.44-9.9; P = 0.02).

Our findings on RANTES allele/haplotype distribution among the elderly suggest a RANTES genetic determinant that is prone to a pro-inflammatory phenotype in males and an anti-inflammatory phenotype in females, which could contribute to the known sex-specific differences in aging. Sexual dimorphism in immune responsiveness has been reported with respect to genetic background. Some evidence of an increase in frequency of the IL-10 anti-inflammatory cytokine gene in long-lived males has been reported [12], and early work suggested that sexual dimorphism existed in immune responsiveness in the HLA supratype A1B8Cw7DR3 [13]. 

Haplotypes for RANTES gene markers were inferred by pLink software (pLink web resource available at http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/~purcell/plink/). Haplotype distribution between the elderly and controls in all subjects, males, and females showed significant differences (Omnibus test P = 0.02, P = 0.05 and P = 0.04, respectively) (Table 1). 

It has been previously described that the inflammation index, calculated as the sum of positive indicators such as C-reactive protein, plasma fibrinogen, and urinary albumin, shows sex differences and varies with age [14]. Women have a higher inflammation index during all life stages compared with men but slower rates of increase in inflammation with age. This can contribute to the decrease in the inflammation differences between the sexes in the elderly population (>80 years old) [14]. Moreover, it has been suggested that the female sex hormone estrogen may increase the expression of antioxidantFinding. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.cyto.2011.12.021.

References:
[1] Franceschi C, Bonaf M, Valensin S, Olivieri F, De Luca M, Ottaviani E, et al. Inflamm-aging: An evolutionary perspective on immunosenescence. Ann NY Acad Sci; 2000:908.
[2] Candore G et al. Cytokine gene polymorphisms and atherosclerosis. In: Vandenbroeck K, editor. Cytokine gene polymorphisms in multifactorial conditions. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
[3] Rea IM et al. Cytokine gene polymorphisms and longevity. In: Vandenbroeck K, editor. Cytokine gene polymorphisms in multifactorial conditions. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
[4] Zhernakova A, Alizadeh BZ, Eerligh P, Hanifi-Moghaddam P, Schloot NC, Diosdado B, et al. Genetic variants of RANTES are associated with serum RANTES level and protection for type 2 diabetes. Genes Immun; 2006:7.
[5] An P, Nelson GW, Wang L, Donfield S, Goedert JJ, Phair J, et al. Modulating influence on HIV/AIDS by interacting RANTES gene variants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA; 2002:99.
[6] Samson M, Libert F, Doranz B, Rucker J, Liesnard C, Farber C, et al. Resistance to HIV-1 infection in Caucasian individuals bearing mutant alleles of the CCR-5 chemokine receptor gene. Nature; 1996:382.
[7] Potteaux S. Role of bone marrow-derived CC-chemokine receptor in the development of atherosclerosis of low-density lipoprotein receptor knockout mice. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol; 2006:26.
[8] Laplana M, Sanchez-de-la-Torre M, Aguil A, Casado I, Flores M, Sanchez-Pellicer R, et al. Tagging long-lived individuals through vitamin-D receptor (VDR) haplotypes. Biogerontology; 2007:8.
[9] Jones KL, Maguire JJ, Davenport AP. Chemokine receptor CCR5: from AIDS to atherosclerosis. Br J Pharmacol; 2011:162.
[10] Balistreri CR, Candore G, Caruso M, Incalcaterra E, Franceschi C, Caruso C. Role of polymorphisms of CC-chemokine receptor-5 gene in acute myocardial infarction and biological implications for longevity. Haematologica; 2004:89.
[11] Balistreri CR, Carruba G, Calabrese M, Campisi I, Di Carlo D, Lio D, et al. CCR5 proinflammatory allele in prostate cancer risk: a pilot study in patients and centenarians from Sicily. Ann NY Acad Sci; 2006:1089.
[12] Lio D, Scola L, Crivello A, Colonna-Romano G, Candore G, Bonaf M, et al. Inflammation, genetics, and longevity: further studies on the protective effects in men of IL-10 -1082 promoter SNP and its interaction with TNF-alpha -308 promoter SNP. J Med Genet; 2003:40.
[13] Rea IM, Middleton D. Is the phenotypic combination A2B5Cw1DR15 a marker for male longevity? J Am Geriatr Soc; 2003:51.
[14] Yang Y, Kozloski M. Sex differences in age trajectories of physiological dysregulation: inflammation, metabolic syndrome, and allostatic load. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci; 2011:66.
[15] Eskes T, Haanen C. Why do women live longer than men? Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol; 2007:133.

The role of sex differences in age trajectories is still unresolved. Our data shows that the RANTES genetic component differs between males and females and could contribute to their differences in aging trajectories. The appropriate regulation of the inflammatory response by a proper balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines could be an important factor in reaching extreme longevity. Assuming all the limitations previously mentioned, our results encourage further studies to replicate our findings and to search for additional inflammation-related genes that could define an inflammation-related genetic component contributing to