Contents lists are available on the ScienceDirect Experimental Gerontology journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/expgero.

Absence of Association between SNPs in the Promoter Region of the Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 (IGF-1) Gene and Longevity in the Han Chinese Population

Liang Xie a,b,c,1, Yuan-ying Gong a,c,1, Shi-gang Lian d, Juan Yang d, Ya Yang e, Shou-jun Gao f, Liang-you Xu f, Ya-ping Zhang a,b,* 

aState Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650223, China 
bLaboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resource, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, China 
cGraduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 
dPeoples Hospital of Dujiangyan City, Dujiangyan 611830, China 
eKey Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms and Learning and Memory, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650223 
fDujiangyan Longevity Research Centre, Dujiangyan 611830, China 

Previous studies have indicated that genetic variations in factors of insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling pathway could influence human lifespan by affecting IGF-1 levels. The promoter region of the IGF-1 gene is an obvious candidate but has not been studied clearly. To explore the potential role of promoter region variation in the IGF-1 gene in longevity, we investigated 485 longevity subjects and 392 younger individuals from Dujiangyan, China. By sequencing about 2.5 kb upstream from the transcription start site of exon 1 of the IGF-1 gene in 30 individuals from both groups, we acquired three previously described SNPs (rs2288377, rs5742612, and rs35767). We examined the association between these three SNPs and longevity by comparing the distribution of genotypes, alleles, and haplotypes in both the longevity and control groups. None of these variants were found to be associated with longevity. Our results suggest that there is no association between SNPs in the promoter region of the IGF-1 gene and longevity in the Han Chinese population.

2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction

Factors in the insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway may contribute to longevity by affecting IGF-1 levels. Bonafe et al. suggested that rs2229765 in the IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) is associated with the production of IGF-1 (Bonafe et al., 2003). Another study reported that rs2854744 located in insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3) promoter region could affect circulating levels of IGFBP3, which might influence circulating levels of IGF-1 accordingly (Deal et al., 2001). Recently, one study in centenarians suggested that variations of IGF-1R may contribute to longevity gender-specifically by increasing IGF-1 levels in female centenarians (Suh et al., 2008). Meanwhile, another study supported that specific SNPs in the IGF-1 gene can influence circulating levels of IGF-1 significantly (Patel et al., 2008). Unfortunately, as far as we know, there is still no research on the association between polymorphisms of the IGF-1 promoter region and longevity, although the promoter region is important to the expression of the IGF-1 gene and serum IGF-1 levels. To explore the potential role of promoter region variation in the IGF-1 gene in longevity, we performed an association study on the SNPs of the promoter region of IGF-1 and longevity in the Han Chinese population.

Ageing is a complex physical process with a variety of changes occurring in many aspects of bodily functions such as physiology and endocrinology. In this process, genetic and environmental factors interact with each other and greatly contribute to the aging process. In 2001, Mitchell et al. estimated a heritability of 25% of lifespan in an Amish population in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania (Mitchell et al., 2001), which implied a relatively strong genetic background in human lifespan. Meanwhile, in invertebrate (Kenyon, 2001) and mice (Holzenberger et al., 2003) studies, a conserved insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway was speculated to be involved in the regulation of longevity (Bartke, 2008; Tatar et al., 2003). IGF-1 is one of the major factors in the insulin/IGF-1 signaling pathway. In humans,the SNP sites was directly sequenced for the two regions. Any ambiguous results were confirmed by another PCR and sequencing. In the early 1990s, research was conducted on the functional mechanism of the promoter region of IGF-1 (Jansen et al., 1992; Kim et al., 1991), but the results did not provide adequate information to understand the regulation mechanism of IGF-1. There are two promoters located in either exon 1 (P1) or exon 2 (P2) in the IGF-1 gene, and exon 1 50-UTR is considered a potential region for regulatory elements (Rodriguez et al., 2007), which is why we chose this segment. Considering the important role of IGF-1 in life processes, it is necessary to elucidate the association between the regulation of IGF-1 expression and the aging process distinctly. To our knowledge, it is the first time an association study has been conducted between the SNPs in the 50 flanking region of IGF-1 and longevity in the Han Chinese population. In our research, the longevity and control populations were recruited from the same area. They shared a similar living environment and common diet habits, which excluded non-genetic factors to a great extent. Our investigation indicated that individuals in both populations were native Han inhabitants in this research, thus avoiding population stratification to a certain extent in our study (Marchini et al., 2004).

The HWE (Hardy Weinberg equilibrium) test and linkage disequilibrium test were performed using Genepop 3.4 software (Raymond and Rousset, 1995) and Haploview software (Barrett et al., 2005). Several studies have been conducted on the association between these three SNPs and cancers. In 2006, a study showed that homozygosity of the minor allele of 1246C/T (rs35767) was associated with a reduction in the risk of breast cancer and a significant decrease in circulating IGFBP3 levels in elderly Caucasian women (Canzian et al., 2006). Another study suggested that there was a 30% reduction in the risk of colorectal cancer associated with possession of one or two copies of the C allele compared with TT genotype of 541T/C (rs5742612) in a Singapore Chinese population (Wong et al., 2005). Meanwhile, Iona Cheng et al. found that a haplotype block, which embraced the promoter area, was associated with prostate cancer and that the SNP 439T/A (rs2288377) was associated with prostate cancer, mainly due to linkage disequilibrium (Cheng et al., 2006). Although longevity people are generally free of lethal age-related cancers (Bonafe et al., 2002), we could not find any association between the three SNPs and longevity in our study. The primary reason might be the complicated relationship between cancers and longevity (Campisi, 2003), which can abate the effect of genetic association studies. Different ethnic populations, sample sizes, and living circumstances for people in these studies can also be another reason. The last but not least, the intricate Insulin/IGF-1 signal pathway in the aging process cannot be excluded. It has been reported that a composite score of selective variants in several Insulin/IGF-1 signal pathway genes was associated with height and longevity (van Heemst et al., 2005). That is to say, the variants in IGF-1 promoter region may work in tandem with variants in other genes in this pathway, which cannot be shown in an association study that only includes this region.

Our study does not support the association between SNPs in the promoter region of the IGF-1 gene and longevity in the Han Chinese population. It is just a primary and explorative step to explore the possible function of this region in human longevity. Studies based on a larger subject group and longer potential sequence segments in this region and other genes are required to test our results.

We are grateful to the individuals who participated in this research. Additionally, we thank Dr. Hui Li, Dr. Chengye Wang, and Kristen Choffe for their help in preparing the paper. This work was supported by National Basic Research Program of China (No. 2007CB507405), Light in Western China of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 30621092), and Bureau of Science and Technology of Yunnan Province.

References:

Barrett, J.C., Fry, B., Maller, J., Daly, M.J., 2005. Haploview: analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics 21, 263-265.

Bonafe, M., Barbi, C., Storci,Life span in the Old Order Amish: Am. J. Med. Genet. 
Patel, A.V., Cheng, I., Canzian, F., Le Marchand, L., Thun, M.J., Berg, C.D., Buring, J., Calle, E.E., Chanock, S., Clavel-Chapelon, F., Cox, D.G., Dorronsoro, M., Dossus, L., Haiman, C.A., Hankinson, S.E., Henderson, B.E., Hoover, R., Hunter, D.J., Kaaks, R., Kolonel, L.N., Kraft, P., Linseisen, J., Lund, E., Manjer, J., Marty, C.,
Peeters, P.H., Pike, M.C., Pollak, M., Riboli, E., Stram, D.O.,
Tjonneland, A., Travis, R.C., Trichopoulos, D., Tumino,
R. and Yeager M. found that IGF-, IGFBP-, and IGFBP- polymorphisms predict circulating IGF levels. Additionally,
Mitchell B.D.,
Hsueh W.C.,
King T.M.,
Pollin T.I.,
Sorkin J.,
Agarwala R.,
Schaffer A.A.,
Shuldiner A.R. studied the heritability of life span in the Old Order Amish in the American Journal of Medical Genetics (2008).