Experimental Gerontology 39 (2004) 1223-1232 www.elsevier.com/locate/expgero

Genetic Diversity of KIR in Immunosenescence and Longevity within the Irish Population

D. Maxwell a,b,*, Owen A. Ross a,b, Martin D. Curran b, I. Maeve Rea c, Derek Middleton a,d

a School of Biology and Biochemistry, Queen's University of Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Northern Ireland
b Department of Geriatric Medicine, Queen's University of Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK
c School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulster, Coleraine, Northern Ireland, UK
d Northern Ireland Regional Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Blood Transfusion Building, City Hospital, Belfast BT9 7TS, Northern Ireland, UK

Received 23 March 2004; received in revised form 19 May 2004; accepted 26 May 2004
Available online 19 June 2004

Abstract

Natural killer (NK) cells play a pivotal role in the innate immune response. During the ageing process, variations occur in NK cell number and function. The cytolytic activity of NK cells is controlled by an array of activating and inhibitory cell surface receptors, including the killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs). In the present study, genetic diversity of the KIR loci was analyzed with respect to successful ageing in the Irish population. A PCR-SSOP KIR gene identification system was employed to determine the frequency of the named KIR genes/pseudogenes and KIR genotypes within a healthy aged cohort and young control group. Although two KIR genes (2DS3, 2DL5) displayed an initial increased frequency in the aged group, this association lost significance when repeated in a second cohort. Given the lack of studies to date investigating the role of the KIR gene system in healthy ageing, further analysis of KIR diversity is required to elucidate its role in age-related disease and longevity.

Keywords: Natural killer cell; KIR; Polymorphism; Ageing; Belfast

1. Introduction

Natural killer (NK) cells play a pivotal role in the innate immune response, and an increase in the number of NK cells is observed in healthy elderly individuals due to expansion of the functionally mature NK cell subset (McNerlan et al., 1998; Solana et al., 1999). Accompanying the rise in NK cell number, a decrease in cytotoxic capacity occurs on a per cell basis, and thus overall NK cell cytotoxicity in the healthy aged is maintained at a level comparable to young controls (Di Lorenzo et al., 1999; Miyaji et al., 2000). Studies suggesting that impaired NK cell activity is associated with atherosclerosis and death due to infection in the elderly have also been reported (Bruunsgaard et al., 2001; Ogata et al., 2001). These findings support the hypothesis that a well-preserved NK cell activity is important for successful aging.

Deterioration of the immune system with age (immunosenescence) and the associated increased susceptibility of the elderly to infectious disease, cancer, and autoimmune disorders have led to extensive investigation of immune parameters in the aged (Pawelec and Solana, 1997; Franceschi et al., 2000a; Malaguarnera et al., 2001). Several studies have reported a decline in T cell number and function and a decrease in B cell number, which collectively would result in impaired cellular and humoral immune responses (reviewed by Ginaldi et al., 1999). Accompanying the decline in adaptive immune function, alterations in certain cells that mediate non-specific immunity are also observed.

Due to their role in the innate response, NK cells provide a first line of defense against infectious agents and cancer (Malnati et al., 1993; Biron et al., 1999; Wu and Lanier, 2003) and are also thought to play a role in autoimmunity (Shi et al., 2000; Singal et al., 2000). NK cells mediate their immune function through the recognition and lysis of abnormal cells that either lack the expression or express inadequate amounts of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules (Ljunggren and Karre, 1990). The ability of NK cells to discriminate between normal and HLA class I-deficient cells is due to the expression of clonally distributed HLA class I-specific inhibitory receptors (Radaev and Sun, 2003). Subsequent NK cell-mediated lysis of HLA class I-deficient cells arises from the expression of HLA class I-specific activating receptors by NK cell clonal populations (Biassoni etKIR genes represent two mechanisms underlying KIR polymorphism (Witt et al., 1999).

2.1. Subjects

One hundred unrelated control samples (59% female, 41% male with an age-range of 19-45 years old) were chosen at random from the DNA bank of anonymous healthy Caucasian individuals from the Northern Ireland population, stored at the Northern Ireland Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Laboratory (NIHIL), Belfast City Hospital. Ninety-three unrelated aged samples (70% female, 30% male with an age-range of 80-97 years old) from the BELFAST study (Rea et al., 2000) were also included in the study. A second subset of 89 unrelated healthy control samples (69% female, 31% male with an age-range of 19-45 years) from the NIHIL DNA bank and 89 unrelated aged samples (70% female, 30% male with an age-range of 80-97 years) from the BELFAST study were analyzed in an attempt to confirm any significant findings following analysis of the first cohort of samples. All aged DNA samples were from healthy elderly Caucasian individuals from the BELFAST study of the Northern Ireland population displaying no signs of age-related disorders, still living independently and approximating SENIEUR status (Ligthart et al., 1984, 1990). Ethical approval was obtained from the Queens University of Belfast ethics committee.

2.2. KIR genotyping by PCR-SSOP

PCR amplification was performed using the appropriate primer combinations for each target region (Table 1) in a 100 ml reaction volume containing 67 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8; 16 mM (NH4)2SO4; 2.0 mM MgCl2; 0.01%(w/v) Tween-20; 200 mM of each dNTP; 0.2 mM of each primer; 3 units Taq polymerase (Bioline, London, UK); 0.1-0.5 mg DNA. After an initial denaturation step of 96°C for 5 min, the cycling conditions specified in the legend of Table 1 were employed for each target region. After the final cycle, the samples were held at 72°C for 5 min and then at 15°C until removed from the PCR machine. Successful amplification was confirmed using gel electrophoresis on a 1.5% agarose gel stained with ethidium bromide (0.5 mg/ml).

Table 1: PCR primer combinations used for specific amplification of KIR genes from genomic DNA

Target Primer 5' Sequence 3' PCR product KIR genes amplified region name size(bp) Trans/cyt 
TMF1 GCTGTGATTAGGTACTCAGTGGCC 930 3DL1-3, 3DS1, 2DL1-5, 2DL1*004, 2DS1-5, Domaina 
TMF2 GTTCTGATTGGGACCTCAGTGGTC 
TMF3 ATTCTGATTGGGACCTCAGTGGCT 
DmcytR TTGAGACAGGGCT(GA)TTGTCTCC 
D2 Ig D2F TTCCAGGTCA(TC)ATXTG(AG)GAAACCTTC 302 3DL1-3, 3DS1, 2DL1-5, 2DS1-5, 2DP1, 3DP1 Domainb 
D2R ACCTGTGAC(AG)GAAACAAGCAGTGG 
D2R2 ACCTGTGACAGAAAC(GA)(GA)GCAGTGG 
D1 Ig D1F AGAGAXXGTCATCCTGCA(AG)TGTTGGTC 241 3DL1-3, 3DS1, 2DL1-3, 2DS1-5, 2DP1, 3DP1 Domainc 
D1R GATCACXATGTCCAG(AG)GG(GA)TCACTGG 
D0 Ig D0F-1 GTGGTCAGGACAAXCCCTTXCT(GC)TCTGCC(CT)GGC 265 2DL4-5, 3DL1-3, 3DS1, 2DP1, 3DP1 Domaind 
D0F-2 GTGGTCAGGACAAGCCCTTCTGCTCTGCCTGGC 
D0RR1 GGGTTGCTGGGTGC(TC)GACCACC 
D0RR2 GGGTTGCTGGGTGC(TC)GACCACTC 

Thein the elderly population may suggest a role in successful ageing. However, further studies with larger sample sizes are needed to confirm these findings. It is also important to note that in this study, activating KIR genes were found at a lower frequency compared to inhibitory KIR genes in all sample groups, which is consistent with previous studies. Overall, the results suggest that KIR genes may play a role in successful ageing by optimizing NK cell activity in the elderly population.In healthy aged individuals, the activating receptor may play a role in providing improved innate immune protection against virus infections and cancer. The exact mechanism through which this occurs is somewhat speculative. It is possible that certain activating KIR genes may be up-regulated in response to oncogenesis and infection, leading to improved NK cell-mediated killing of abnormal cells and more efficient elimination of viral infections and tumour cells. 

NK cells play a crucial role in the innate immune response by eliminating abnormal cells that display compromised HLA class I expression. This cytolytic activity is regulated by a range of activating and inhibitory receptors with HLA class I ligand specificity, such as KIRs. This study investigated the potential role of KIR diversity in immunosenescence and longevity in the Irish population. Inhibitory KIRs also modulate NK cell activity, which can provide beneficial effects for healthy ageing. Certain inhibitory KIR genes encode receptors that prevent NK cell-mediated lysis of healthy autologous cells with normal levels of HLA class I expression, which is crucial in preventing self-reactivity and autoimmune disorders. 

However, dysfunctional mechanisms controlling the expression levels of inhibitory KIR genes could lead to reduced cell surface expression of HLA class I restricted inhibitory KIRs, allowing NK cell-mediated lysis of healthy autologous cells expressing normal levels of HLA class I. This scenario may arise via the interaction of HLA class I independent activating NK receptors with their ligands, such as natural cytotoxicity receptors that possess ligands other than HLA class I expressed by normal autologous cells. Thus, certain inhibitory KIR genes may be more susceptible to aberrant expression in ageing, providing an increased disposition to autoimmune disorders.

A PCRSSOP typing system was used to determine the presence or absence of known KIR genes in a cohort of healthy aged individuals and young control subjects, but no individual KIR genotype was found to be associated with successful ageing, suggesting that the polygenic nature of the KIR loci may not be a major influence in longevity. The study encountered a high level of genotypic diversity in the sample groups, which was not entirely unexpected due to the polygenic nature of KIRs. This makes the identification of a specific KIR gene combination challenging.

Recent studies have suggested that gender is a variable concerning the genetics of ageing, and certain combinations of KIR genes may exert subtle gender-dependent effects during the ageing process. However, more research is required to elucidate the precise role that NK cells play in longevity, including larger pooled sample groups aimed at investigating whether the polymorphic nature of genes encoded within the LRC is important in ageing. 

Acknowledgements go to the R&D Office of Health and Personal Social Services (Northern Ireland) and the Department of Employment and Learning (Northern Ireland) for their support, as well as all participants in the study. Both cytokines and HLA class I molecules mediate important immunomodulatory functions for NK cell activity. Certain cytokines including IL-2, IL-15 and IL-18 induce NK cell activity while HLA class I molecules are ligands for certain activating and inhibitory KIRs. Epistatic interactions between particular cytokine, HLA, and KIR haplotypes may contribute to successful ageing or reduced lifespan. 

References: 
Arm, J.P., Nwankwo, C., Austen, K.F., Molecular identification of a novel family of human Ig superfamily members that possess immunoreceptor tyrosine based inhibition motifs and homology to the mouse gpB inhibitory receptor. J. Immunol., Biassoni, R., Cantoni, C., Falco, M.,Pende, D., Millo, R., Moretta, L., Bottino, C., Moretta, A., "Human natural killer cell activating receptors." Mol. Immunol., Biron, C.A., Nguyen, K.B., Pien, G.C., Cousens, L.P., Salazar-Mather, T.P., "Natural killer cells in antiviral defense: function and regulation by innate cytokines." Annu. Rev. Immunol., Bonafe, M., Olivieri, F., Cavallone, L., Giovagnetti, S., Marchegiani, F., Cardelli, M., Pieri, C., Marra, M., Antonicelli, R., Lisa, R., Rizzo, M.R., Paolisso, G., Monti, D., Franceschi, C. "A gender-dependent genetic predisposition to produce high levels of IL-6 is detrimental for longevity." Eur. J. Immunol., Bruhns, P., Marchetti, P., Fridman, W.H., Vivier, E., Daeron, M. "Differential roles of N- and C-terminal ITIMs during inhibition of cell activation by killer cell inhibitory receptors." J. Immunol.,
The present study aimed to investigate the potential role that KIR diversity may play in immunosenescence and longevity within the Irish population. However, no significant association between successful ageing and KIR gene content was observed. A number of reasons could help explain this lack of association; sample numbers are always a concern when examining regions of extreme genetic diversity and the use of two independent aged sampling cohorts was employed to try and minimize any false-positive findings of association. In the context of the present study (L.D. Maxwell et al. / Experimental Gerontology 39 (2004) 1223-1232), Lio, D., Scola, L., Crivello, A., Colonna-Romano, G., Candore, G., Bonafe, M., Cavallone, L., Franceschi, C., Caruso, C. "Gender-specific association between IL-6 promoter polymorphism and longevity." Genes Immun., Ljunggren, H.G., Karre, K. "In search of the missing self: MHC molecules and NK cell recognition." Immunol. Today, Malaguarnera, L., Ferlito, L., Imbesi, R.M., Gulizia, G.S., Di Mauro, S., Maugeri, D., Malaguarnera, M., Messina, A. "Immunosenescence: a review." Arch. Gerontol. Geriatr.,
Malnati, M.S., Lusso, P., Ciccone, C., Moretta, A., Moretta, L., Long, E.O. "Recognition of virus-infected cells by natural killer cell clones is controlled by polymorphic target cell elements." J. Exp. Med.,
Marsh, S.G.E., Parham, P., Dupont, B., Geraghty, D.E., Trowsdale, J., Middleton, D., Vilches, C., Carrington, M., Witt, C., Guethlein, L.A., Shilling,Hsu K.C., Garcia,C.A.,"Killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) nomenclature report," Hum. Immunol.,
Merlan S.E., Rea I.M., Alexander H.D., Morris T.C. "Changes in natural killer cells,the CD56(+)CD16(+) subset,and related cytokines in healthy aging." J. Clin. Immunol.,
Martin A.M., Freitas E.M., Witt C.S., Christianssen S.T. "The genomic organization and evolution of the natural killer immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) gene cluster." Immunogenetics, Meyaard, L., Adema, G.J., Chang, C., Woolatt, E., Sutherland, G.R., Lanier, L.L., Phillips, J.H. "LAIR-1, a novel inhibitory receptor expressed on human mononuclear leukocytes." Immunity,
Middleton D., Williams F., Cullen C., Mallon E. "Modification of an HLA-B PCR-SSOP typing system leading to improved allele determination." Tissue Antigens,
Middleton D., Curran M., Maxwell L. "Natural killer cells and their receptors." Transpl. Immunol.,
Miller S.A., Dykes D.D., Poleskey H.F. "A simple salting out procedure for extracting DNA from human nucleated cells." Nucleic Acids Res.,
Miyaji C., Watanabe H., Toma H., Akisaka M., Tomiyama K., Sato Y., Abo T. "Functional alteration of granulocytes,B., Wu, J., Leong, C., Phillips, J.H. Immunoreceptor DAP bearing a tyrosine-based activation motif is involved in activating NK cells. Nature, 
Lazetic, S., Chang, C., Houchins, J.P., Lanier, L.L., Phillips, J.H. Human natural killer cell receptors involved in MHC class I are disulfide-linked heterodimers of CD and NKG. J. Immunol. (), 
Ligthart, G.J., Corberand, J.X., Fournier, C., Galanaud, P., Hijmans Kennes, B., Muller-Hermelink, H.K., Steinmann, G.G. Selection criteria for immunogerontological studies in humans: SENIEUR protocol. Mech. Ageing Dev., 
Ligthart, G.J., Corberand, J.X., Goertzen, H.G.M., Minder, A.E., D.L., Hijmans,W. Necessity of assessing health status in human immunogerontological studies: evaluation of the protocol. Mech. Ageing Dev.,
Bruunsgaard, H., Pedersen, A.N., Schroll, M., Skinhoj, P., Pedersen B.K. Decreased natural killer activity is associated with atherosclerosis. 
M., Cavallone L., Franceschi C., Caruso C. Gender-specific association between IL- promoter polymorphism and longevity. Genes Immun. (), 
Ljunggren H.G., Karre K. In search of the missing self: MHC molecules and NK cell recognition. Immunol. Today,
Malaguarnera L., Ferlito L., Imbesi R.M., Gulizia G.S., Di Mauro S., Maugeri D.,
Malaguarnera M., Messina A. Immunosenescence: a review. Arch. Gerontol. Geriatr.,
Malnati, M.S., Lusso, P., Ciccone, C., Moretta, A., Moretta, L., Long, E.O. Recognition of virus-infected cells by natural killer cell clones is controlled by polymorphic target cell elements. J. Exp. Med.,
Marsh S.G.E., Parham P., Dupont B., Geraghty D.E., Trowsdale J., Middleton D., Vilches C., Carrington M., Witt C., Guethlein L.A. Shilling H., Garcia C.A., Hsu K.C., Wain H. Killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) nomenclature report, Hum. Immunol.,
Merlan S.E., Rea I.M., Alexander H.D., Morris T.C. Changes in natural killer cells, the CD CD subset, and related cytokines in healthy aging. J. Clin. Immunol. (),
Martin A.M., Freitas E.M., Witt C.S., Christianssen S.T. The genomic organization and evolution of the natural killer immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) gene cluster. Immunogenetics,
Meyaard L., Adema G.J., Chang C., Woolatt E., Sutherland G.R., Lanier L.L.,
Phillips J.H. LAIR-1, a novel inhibitory receptor expressed on human mononuclear leukocytes.Immunity,
Middleton D., Williams F., Cullen C., Mallon E. Modification of an HLA-B PCR-SSOP typing system leading to improved allele determination.Tissue Antigens,
Middleton D., Curran M., Maxwell L. Natural killer cells and their receptors.Transpl. Immunol.,
Miller S.A., Dykes D.D., Poleskey H.F.A simple salting out procedure for extracting DNA from human nucleated cells. Nucleic Acids Res.,
Cantoni C., Falco M., Pessino A., Moretta A., Moretta L., Biassoni R. p140, a putative HLA-G-specific inhibitory NK receptor belonging to the immunoglobulin superfamily. J. Reprod. Immunol. (),
Carretero M., Cantoni C., Bellon T., Bottino C., Biassoni R., Rodriguez A., Perez-Villar J.J., Moretta L., Moretta A., Lopez-Botet M. The CD94 and NKG2-A C-type lectins covalently assemble to form a natural killer cell inhibitory receptor for HLA class I molecules. Eur. J. Immunol. (),
Crum K.A., Logue S.E., Curran M.D., Middleton D. Development of a PCR-SSOP approach capable of defining the natural killer cell inhibitory receptor (KIR) gene sequence repertoires.Tissue Antigens,
Di Lorenzo G., Balistreri C.R., Candore G., Cign