variants alone. The present study aimed to investigate the association between CETP and APOE polymorphisms and dyslipidemia risk in oldest-old Chinese women. Dyslipidemia is a common risk factor for atherosclerosis and CAD, and its genetic contributors in the oldest-old population, particularly females, remain poorly understood. CETP and APOE have been identified as plausible candidate genes for longevity due to their roles in circulating lipid homeostasis. However, the interplay between these genes has not been fully explored. Our study analyzed the distribution of CETP*V (rs5882) and APOE*4 (rs429358 and rs7412) in 372 oldest-old Chinese women (aged 80-109) and 340 controls (aged 20-58). We found that APOE*4 was associated with high cholesterol (hTC) and mixed dyslipidemia, whereas CETP*V was independently associated with hypertriglyceridemia (hTG). Furthermore, we found evidence of a significant CETP*APOE interaction associated with hTG. The odds for hTG were more than 4-fold in subjects with CETP*V and APOE*4 than those without either.

In conclusion, our study provides evidence of strong independent associations between hTG and CETP*V in oldest-old Chinese females. Additionally, APOE*4 might interact with CETP*V resulting in an increased risk for hTG. These findings highlight the importance of considering gene-gene interactions when investigating dyslipidemia risk in the oldest-old population.Analysis and/or revealed by the combinatory effect of loci in other pathways (Ndiaye et al., 2013). Thus, we hypothesized that the polymorphisms of CETP and APOE might interact in the signaling pathway, which could have greater effects on the dysregulation of serum lipids in oldest-old Chinese women. This study was conducted to assess potential CETP*APOE interaction and contribution to dyslipidemia in oldest-old Chinese women by the traditional parametric approach of logistic regression and the nonparametric method of multifactor dimensionality reduction.

2. Materials and methods 

2.1. Subjects 

The current study was based on the Longevity and Health of Aging Population in Guangxi China study conducted in 2008 and 2010. Yongfu County has been qualified as the longevity town by Geriatric Society of China in 2007.

3. Results 

We analyzed a total of 713 female Chinese subjects, including 372 oldest-old subjects and 340 controls in the present study. Subjects in oldest-old group had significantly lower TG and BMI; and higher FPG, LDL-c, HR, SBP, and DBP when compared with controls (Table 1). Seven hundred and thirteen female volunteers, from urban and rural areas of Yongfu County, South China, were enrolled after having been excluded from the subjects undertaking lipid-lowering drugs. The longevity group comprised 16 centenarians (aged 100-109), 322 nonagenarians (aged 90-99), and 34 octogenarians (aged 80-89). The geography and nationality matched control group consisted of 340 unrelated volunteers (aged 20-58, mean age 41.88 ± 12.20 years) without longevity history (no lineal family members aged above 80 for 3 generations). All subjects self-reported as belonging to Han nationality. The Ethics Committee of Beijing Hospital, Ministry of Health approved the study protocol. All participants were informed and provided with informed consent in writing.

Distributions of CETP and APOE polymorphisms in the oldest-old group and controls were in HWE (Table 2). Comparison between oldest-old and controls showed that, as expected, APOE*4 was less frequent in the oldest-old group (23.5% vs. 14.0% in controls vs. oldest-old, respectively; P = 0.001). No contribution of CETP I405V for longevity was found (P = 0.347). Stratified analysis in the oldest-old group according to the NCEP ATP III criteria suggested that APOE*4 also significantly associated with the risk for hTC (P = 0.001) and mixed dyslipidemia (P < 0.001). In addition, we also found that CETP genotype distributed differently between hTG and Control groups (P = 0.002), with hTG having a higher proportion of VV genotype in the hTG subgroup (30.5% vs.15.7% in hTG vs. controls, respectively).

As noted in Fig. 1, BMI, alcohol drinking, and TC increased the risk of hTG in our oldest-old subjects, and HDL-c significantly decreased the risk (P < 0.05). The odds of hTG for subjects with CETP*V allele were 1.88 times greater than subjects without the risk allele in the univariate polymorphism logistic regression model. After adjustment for APOE*4, age, BMI, alcohol drinking, TC, HDL-c, and LDL-c, the risk contribution was consistent (P < 0.05). When coupled with APOE genotypes containing at least one risk allele, the odds of being affected increased to 4.36 times greater for subjects with the CETP*V allele than those with neither risk allele. In addition, the interaction item estimated by logistic regression between CETP*V and APOE*4 significantly increased the risk of hTG (P = 0.002, OR = 3.25). There was no evidence for an increased risk for hTG due to the presence of APOE*4 itself (P = 0.079). In addition, we failed to repeat the findings that CETP conferred the risk of hTG and the interaction with APOE in our middle-aged controls (data not shown).

As shown in Table 3, according to whether individuals carry the risk allele (APOE*4 and CETP*V), Student t-test suggested higher TC (P = 0.004), TG (P = 0.044), and LDL-c (P = 0.007) in oldest-old females with APOE*4 compared to APOE*2, which was also observed in controls (data not shown). In addition, TG was significantly increased in subjects with CETP*3.39 18.25 3.48 0.115 0.074 HR (times/min) 81.77 14.23 79.86 10.98 79.78 10.82 80.47 12.67 0.398 0.493 SBP (mmHg) 157.45 23.16 154.47 26.36 153.78 25.84 156.90 26.35 0.549 0.232 DBP (mmHg) 83.59 12.60 79.27 12.64 82.44 15.49 82.46 14.86 0.087 0.987 FPG: fasting plasma glucose; TC: total cholesterol; TG: triglycerides; HDL-c: high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; LDL-c: low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; BMI: body mass index; HR: heart rate; SBP: systolic blood pressure; DBP: diastolic blood pressure.
Subjects were selected to reduce the confounding of gender and ensure preferable statistical power, as dyslipidemia is a significant risk factor for CVD and shortens life expectancy in US life tables (Stamler et al.,2000). Because the effects of APOE polymorphism were stronger in women (Song et al.,2004), we only included oldest-old females in this study.

Table4 shows the OR and95%CI of hTG by CETP and APOE polymorphism for oldest-old females.The interaction between CETP and APOE was found to be significantly associated with hTG for oldest-old female subjects, with more than a fourfold increase in hTG risk observed for subjects with both risk alleles (Fig1). Although APOE*4 was not strongly associated with hTG in this population, when APOE*4 was analyzed together with CETP*V, a more significant risk was observed for subjects with both risk alleles.

The stratification Chi-square test, multivariable-adjusted logistic regression, and nonparametric MDR analysis all suggested a significant interaction between CETP and APOE associated with hTG for oldest-old female subjects. CETP*V was significantly associated with hTG, and the risk increased with increasing CETP*V numbers. Subjects who carry the risk CETP*V had a significantly higher risk for hTG compared to CETP*II homozygotes independent from APOE*4, age, BMI, alcohol drinking, TC, TG, HDL-c, and LDL-c.

In conclusion, this study suggests that CETP and APOE polymorphisms might be associated with dyslipidemia in oldest-old Chinese women. The genetic networks between the loci need further investigation to explain the statistical relationship.Circulation: Cardiovascular Genetics, Gudnason, V., Kakko, S., Nicaud, V., Savolainen, M.J., Kesaniemi, Y.A., Tahvanainen, Humphries, S., Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) gene effect on CETP and plasma high-density lipoprotein in European populations. The EARS Eur. J. Clin. Investig., for detecting gene-gene and gene-environment interactions. Bioinformatics    Lamarche, B., Uffelman, K.D., Carpentier, A., Cohn, J.S., Steiner, G., Barrett, P.H., Lewis, Triglyceride enrichment of HDL enhances in vivo metabolic clearance of apo A-I in healthy men. J. Clin. Invest., Moore, J.H., Gilbert, J.C., Tsai, C.T., Chiang, F.T., Holden, T., Barney, N., White, B.C., a flexible computational framework for detecting, characterizing and statistically analyzing patterns of epistasis in genetic studies of human disease. J. Theor. Biol., Ndiaye, N.C., Said el S., Stathopoulou M.G., Siest G., Tsai M.Y., Visvikis-Siest S., Epistatic study reveals two genetic interactions in blood pressure regulation. Med. Genet.   Panza F., Solfrizzi V., Colacicco A.M., Basile A.M., D'Introno A., Capurso C., Sabba Capurso S. Capurso A. Apolipoprotein E (APOE) polymorphism and serum APOE levels in Alzheimer's disease patients and centenarians. Purcell S.. Cherny S.S.. Sham P.C.. Genetic Power Calculator: design of and association genetic mapping studies of complex traits. Bioinformatics, Sanders A.E., Wang C., Katz M., Derby C.A., Barzilai N., Ozelius L., Lipton, Association of a functional polymorphism in the cholesteryl ester protein (CETP) gene with memory decline and incidence of dementia, Schatz I.J., Masaki K., Yano K., Chen R., Rodriguez B.L., Curb J.D., Cholesterol and all-cause mortality in elderly people from the Honolulu Heart Program: a study. Lancet, Song Y., Stampfer M.J., Liu S. Meta-analysis: apolipoprotein E genotypes and their association with coronary heart disease. Ann. Intern. Med. Stamler J., Daviglus M.L., Garside D.B., Dyer A.R., Greenland P., Neaton J.D., Relationship of baseline serum cholesterol levels in large cohorts of younger to long-term coronary, cardiovascular, and all-cause mortality and to JAMA, Sun L., Yang Z., Jin F., Zhu X.Q., Qu Y.C., Shi X.H.. Wang L.. The Gly Ser especially men. Diabet. Med.. Tagalakis A.D.. Dickson J.G.. Owen J.S.. Simons J.P.. Correction of the neuropathogenic human apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene to APOE in using synthetic RNA/DNA oligonucleotides (chimeraplasts). J. Mol. Thompson A.. Di Angelantonio E.. Sarwar N.. Erqou S.. Saleheen D.. Dullaart Keavney B.. Ye Z.. Danesh J.. Association of cholesteryl ester transfer genotypes with CETP mass and activity, lipid levels, and coronary risk. JAMA.

5. Conclusions 
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to simultaneously investigate the contribution of CETP and APOE polymorphisms to dyslipidemia in oldest-old females. Besides the traditional understanding of the association between CETP polymorphism and HDL-c, this study provided evidence of its effect on TG, at least in sub-populations. The results provide evidence of strong independent associations between hTG and CETP*V in the oldest-old Chinese females in this study, and APOE*4, as an independently non-significant variant, might interact with another variant resulting in an increased disease risk. Nevertheless, we fully expect that additional variants, some rare, will be added to the list of polymorphisms that influence healthy status and lifespan. It should be noted that this study was conducted based on a limited population because of the rare prevalence of oldest-old in Yongfu (0.0133%). Accordingly, our study is only a first step toward defining a genetic association with hTG in oldest-old Chinese women, and this has to be further replicated by long-term prospective studies with larger samples across genders. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j