Experimental Gerontology 39 (2004) 801-805 www.elsevier.com/locate/expgero 

Hypothetical soluble KIR2DS4 natural killer cell receptor molecule does not associate with successful ageing in the Irish 

Owen A. Ross, Lynn D. Maxwell, I. Maeve Rea, Martin D. Curran 

a School of Biology and Biochemistry, Queen's University of Belfast, Medical Biology Centre, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7BL, Northern Ireland, UK 
b Northern Ireland Regional Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Laboratory, City Hospital, Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK 
c Department of Geriatric Medicine, Queen's University of Belfast, Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK 

Received 27 November 2003; received in revised form 14 January 2004; accepted 6 February 2004 

Abstract 
The identification of immunogenetic longevity markers is a major area of molecular gerontological research. A number of genetic loci have been examined, e.g. the HLA and cytokine networks. This study investigated a genetic marker within the highly polymorphic KIR gene system with successful ageing in the Irish population. A 22 bp deletion was identified in the KIR2DS4 gene that predicts a truncated soluble KIR molecule with one intact Ig-like domain. The frequency of this variant was determined using a specific-primer PCR methodology. There was no observed association between this common polymorphic variation within this activatory KIR gene and the aged Irish population. This is the first study of KIR polymorphism in ageing and although no association was identified, the importance of the KIR network in the immune response and its polymorphic nature warrants more detailed analysis to ascertain its role in immunosenescence. 

Keywords: KIR; 2DS4 deletion; Polymorphism; Ageing 

1. Introduction 
Elderly individuals maintain overall cytotoxic activity, even though there is an increased number of mature NK cells observed (Di Lorenzo et al., 1999; Solana et al., 1999; Miyaji et al., 2000). NK cells lyse abnormal cells that either lack the expression or express diminished amounts of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I molecules. The ability of NK cells to discriminate between normal and HLA class I-deficient cells is due to the expression of clonally distributed HLA class I inhibitory receptors (Biassoni et al., 2000). With optimal functioning of the immune system, specific genetic determinants may reside in polymorphic loci that regulate the immune response. Dysregulation of immune function accompanying ageing (immunosenescence) is postulated to contribute to morbidity and mortality in the aged, via an increased risk of disease, infection, tumors, and autoimmune disorders (Franceschi et al., 1995, 2000; Solana and Pawelec, 1998; Malaguarnera et al., 2001). 

Human NK cells express two structurally distinct receptor families that mediate their interactions; the c-type lectin-like heterodimer receptors and the immunoglobulin-like (Ig-like) receptors (Lopez-Botet et al., 2000). In contrast to the relatively conserved CD94/NKG2 lectin-like receptors, the Ig-like receptors display considerable variation, particularly the killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR). NK cells clonally express KIR genes and while it is unclear how the repertoire of receptors expressed by NK cells is created, recent studies on the NK cell expression of KIR in different individuals imply that the repertoire is dependent on the presence of different genes in an individual's genome (Uhrberg et al., 1997; Shilling et al., 2002). 

A hypothesis was proposed that a well-preserved NK cell activity is important for successful ageing (Sansoni et al., 1993; Franceschi et al., 1995; Shilling et al., 2002). The KIR gene family represents a highly polymorphic class of receptor-encoding genes, which to date have displayed considerable allelic diversity and it is postulated that KIR polymorphism arises from both the occurrence of random point mutations and recombination between homologous KIR genes (Shilling et al., 1998; Witt et al., 1999). This study aimed to ascertain whether this polymorphism within the KIR region was associated with successful ageing. 

2. Materials and methods 
Recently, our laboratory reported the presence of a common 22 bp deletion in the activatory KIR2DS4 gene that predicts a soluble KIR molecule (Maxwell et al., 2002). The deletion causes a frameshift predicting a truncated KIR2DS4 protein with a significantly altered D2 domain, which would be secreted due to the loss ofLanes 2 and 6 show the presence of the homozygous deleted 2DS4 form only. Lanes 3, 4, and 7 display the results for homozygous individuals displaying the full-length 2DS4 form only. The present study investigated the frequency of a common 22 bp deletion in the killer immunoglobulin-like receptor gene 2DS4 that predicts a soluble KIR molecule. A simple PCR methodology was employed to genotype 180 aged and 180 young control subjects from the Irish population. The observed frequencies of the deleted and full-length forms of the 2DS4 gene are displayed in Table 1.

The 2DS4-specific oligonucleotide primers employed for the amplification of the 221/199 bp region of the 2DS4 gene were used for PCR amplification. No significant associations were observed for the 2DS4 deletion variant with either age group or with respect to gender. The vast majority of samples examined had the 2DS4 gene, with only approximately 5% of each sample group appearing negative for the gene. The deleted form of the 2DS4 gene was identified at a high frequency (70-80%) within the Irish population as previously reported (Maxwell et al., 2002), raising questions concerning the possible function of this KIR variant. mRNA for this gene was previously reported (Maxwell et al., 2002), and studies are presently underway to identify the hypothetical protein product in blood plasma. If the presence of this soluble KIR can be confirmed, it will be important to elucidate its role in immune response to infection/disease and autoimmunity and its potential effects on aging.

PCR amplification was performed in a 50 ml reaction volume containing 67 mM TrisHCl pH8.8;16 mM (NH ) SO ;1.5 mM MgCl ;0.01% (w/v) Tween;200 mM 4 2 4 2 of each dNTP;0.2 mM of each primer;2 units Taq polymerase (Bioline UK Ltd, London, UK); 0.10.5 mg DNA. The following cycling conditions were employed: samples were held at 96 8C for 5 min, followed by 38 cycles of 96 8C for 1 min, 58 8C for 30 s, 72 8C for 1 min. After the final cycle, the samples were held at 72 8C for 5 min and then at 15 8C until removed from the PCR machine (PerkinElmer 9600 Thermal Cycler).

The function of activating receptors such as remains unresolved. It has been postulated that they act in unison with the inhibitory receptors to cytolytic action or may act in response (Biassoni et al., 2000). Intriguingly, some appear to contain the 2DS4 deletion variant as the activating KIR gene, which again highlights the importance of elucidation of its functional role.

Successful amplification and genotyping were determined using the molecular weight (size: 22 bp) difference between the deleted and non-deleted forms of the 2DS4 gene via gel electrophoresis on a 2% Metaphor agarose gel. The observed allele and genotype frequencies for the common polymorphic forms of the KIR loci in the Irish population are displayed in Table1.

All studies to date have treated KIR2DS4 as an independent gene locus. This controversy highlights the work that still needs to be performed on the polygenic/polymorphic KIR loci to fully elucidate the genetic organization and functionality of these NK cell receptors. Notably, when the frequency of the KIR2DS1 gene was examined in an aged and young control group, no association was observed (unpublished data).

The KIR loci are located in the leukocyte receptor cluster on chromosome 19q13, a region previously associated with successful aging in the Irish at the Apo-E loci (Rea et al., 2001). Although no association was demonstrated in this study, the polygenic and polymorphic nature of the KIR loci and primary role of NK cells in response to viral/bacterial infections and tumors warrant more detailed attention. Considering the pivotal role KIRs may play in the innate immune response, it would be of great interest to repeat this analysis in centenarians who are believed to retain optimal immune function, with this study examining the NK cell inhibitory receptor (KIR) gene sequence repertoires.A study is underway to evaluate the role of genetic variation across the KIR gene network in immune senescence and to elucidate the true influence of KIR polymorphism on longevity. "Investigation of Killer Cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptor Gene Diversity II: KIR DS" by Maxwell, L.D., Williams, F., Meenagh, A., and Middleton, D., "Natural Killer Cells and Their Receptors" by Middleton, D. and Curran, M., "Functional Alteration of Granulocytes, NK Cells, and Natural Killer T Cells in Centenarians" by Miyaji, C., Watanabe, H., Toma, H., Akisaka, M., Tomiyama, K., Sato, Y., and Abo, T., "Distribution of Natural Killer Cell Immunoglobulin-like Receptor Sequences in Three Ethnic Groups" by Norman, P.J., Stephens, H.A., Verity, D.H., Chandanayingyong, D., and Vaughan, R.W., "Association between Natural Killer Cell Activity and Infection in Immunologically Normal Elderly People" by Ogata, K., An, E., Shioi, Y., Nakamura, K., Luo, S., Yokose, N., Minami, S., and Dan, K. and "Community-Living Nonagenarians in Northern Ireland Have Lower Plasma Homocysteine but Similar Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase Thermolabile Genotype Prevalence Compared to 70-Year-Old Subjects: Atherosclerosis" by Rea,I.M. et al. are some of the sources used for this study.

The authors are grateful to all the participants of the study for their time and patience. They also acknowledge the following organizations for their support: The R&D Office of the Health and Personal Social Services (Northern Ireland) and the Department of Employment and Learning (Northern Ireland). L.D. Maxwell is a recipient of the Dunville Scholarship awarded by Queens University Belfast.

References: "Human Natural Killer Cell Activating Receptors" by Biassoni, R., Cantoni, C., Falco, M., Pende, D., Millo, R., Moretta, L., Bottino, C., and Moretta, A., "Decreased Natural Killer Activity Is Associated with Atherosclerosis in Elderly Humans" by Bruunsgaard, H., Pedersen, A.N., Schroll, M., Skinhoj, P., and Pedersen, B.K., "Development of a PCR-SSOP Approach Capable of Defining the Natural Killer Cell Biassoni" by Crum, K.A., Logue, S.E., Curran, M.D., and Middleton, D., "Evidence for Recombination as a Mechanism for KIR Diversification" by Shilling, H.G., Lienert-Weidenbach, K., Valiante, N.M., Uhrberg, M., and Parham, P. and "Natural Killer Cells in Healthy Aging" by Solana, R., Alonso, M.C., and Pena J. are also referenced in this study.