difference between centenarians and controls.

Experimental Gerontology 41 (2006) 98-102 www.elsevier.com/locate/expgero

Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) sequence variation is not associated with exceptional human longevity

Friederike Flachsbart, Peter JP. Croucher, Susanna Nikolaus, Jochen Hampe, Christina Cordes, Stefan Schreiber*

Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, 24105 Kiel, Germany
Institute for Medical Informatics and Statistics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, 24105 Kiel, Germany
Hospital for General Internal Medicine, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, 24105 Kiel, Germany

Received 19 August 2005; received in revised form 14 September 2005; accepted 20 September 2005
Available online 27 October 2005

Abstract:
The SIR2/Sirt1 gene has been demonstrated to regulate lifespan in many model organisms, including yeast, Caenorhabditis elegans and rodents. These findings render the human homologue, SIRT1, a very plausible candidate as a modifier of human life expectancy. We therefore sought to investigate whether common allelic variation in the SIRT1 gene was associated with human longevity. Five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), distributed across the entire gene, including the promoter region, were genotyped in our extensive DNA collections of 1573 long-lived individuals (centenarians and nonagenarians) and matched younger controls. Four of the markers were haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNPs) that defined five common haplotypes. No evidence for an association was detected between any of the tested SNPs and the longevity phenotype at the allele, genotype or haplotype levels. These findings, based on an htSNP approach, suggest that there is no noteworthy influence of SIRT1 sequence variation on exceptional human longevity in the German population. However, this does not rule out the possibility that allelic variants in direct regulators or downstream substrates of SIRT1 could play critical roles in extending lifespan in humans.

Keywords: Case-control association design; Centenarians; Long-lived individuals; Aging; Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP); Haplotype-tagging; Lifespan extension; Model organisms; Calorie restriction (CR)

The yeast SIR2 (silent mating type information regulator 2) gene was the first described member of a large gene family that encodes NADC-dependent protein deacetylases. These enzymes are involved in gene silencing, chromatin structure, DNA repair, and control of cellular survival (Guarente, 2000). Expression of extra copies of SIR2 and the nematode homologue sir-2.1 increases lifespan in yeast (Kaeberlein et al., 1999) and Caenorhabditis elegans (Tissenbaum and Guarente, 2001), respectively. The same effect - up-regulation of SIR2 with subsequent life extension - can also be achieved by exposing yeast cells to a low-calorie diet (Lin et al., 2000). The life-prolonging effects of calorie restriction (CR) have also been seen in more complex species, ranging from C. elegans to mammals (Masoro, 2000). Based on these observations, it has been suggested that the evolutionarily conserved SIR2 genes could play a similar role as modulators of lifespan in higher organisms (Guarente, 2000; Hekimi and Guarente, 2003).

1. Introduction
The human homologue SIRT1 is a plausible candidate as a modifier of human life expectancy as the SIR2/Sirt1 gene has been demonstrated to regulate lifespan in many model organisms, including yeast, Caenorhabditis elegans and rodents. Therefore, we investigated whether common allelic variation in the SIRT1 gene is associated with human longevity. We genotyped five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) distributed across the entire gene, including the promoter region, in our extensive DNA collections of 1573 long-lived individuals (centenarians and nonagenarians) and matched younger controls. Four of the markers were haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNPs) that defined five common haplotypes. We found no evidence for an association between any of the tested SNPs and the longevity phenotype at the allele, genotype or haplotype levels. These findings suggest that there is no noteworthy influence of SIRT1 sequence variation on exceptional human longevity in the German population. However, this does not rule out the possibility that allelic variants in direct regulators or downstream substrates of SIRT1 could play critical roles in extending lifespan in humans.

2. Subjects and methods
2.1.Differences between centenarians and controls were analyzed, but no evidence of association was found, even when gender-stratified samples were used. The majority of the genetic variation present within the LD block was captured by selecting five markers of varying minor allele frequency spread across the SIRT1 region. These markers were spaced across the coding region, the 3 UTR, and the promoter of the gene. The promoter of the SIRT1 gene was localized within the genomic sequence NM_012238 to between about 500 and 1000 bp downstream of hCV3003909. The five SNPs defined five haplotypes, with a frequency of over 1% in the control population, and with the three most frequent haplotypes accounting for 92% of the data. Four of these markers were haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNPs), meaning that they were sufficient to resolve the five haplotypes. None of the five-SNP haplotypes differed significantly in frequency between case samples and controls. Single marker case-control analyses on allele and genotype frequency data were performed using contingency table chi-square statistics at the appropriate degrees of freedom using the web-based Simple Interactive Statistical Analysis (SISA) tool available from http://home.clara.net/sisa. The software program Haploview, version 3.2 (http://www.broad.mit.edu/mpg/haploview/) was used to assess all polymorphisms for significant deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, calculate LD (D) between each marker pair, and visualize haplotype structure. Haplotype frequencies were inferred using the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm and the sliding window option implemented in the program COCAPHASE, version 2.403, which is part of the UNPHASED suite (http://portal.litbio.org/; Dudbridge, 2003). COCAPHASE was also used to evaluate the statistical significance of haplotype frequency differences between cases and controls. The SIR2/Sirt1 gene has been shown to regulate lifespan in many model organisms, including yeast, C. elegans, and rodents. In mammals, expression of the SIRT1 protein is activated by various stress stimuli, leading to a breakdown of fat stores, induction of cell cycle arrest and DNA repair processes, or attenuation of apoptosis. Under adverse circumstances, SIRT1 appears to increase organismal longevity by tipping physiological responses away from cell death and towards cellular stress resistance. As effective stress resistance is frequently correlated with extended lifespan in lower eukaryotes, the ability of SIRT1 to modulate reactions to stress in mammalian cells also suggests a potential link between the gene and longevity in mammals, and therefore possibly humans. The entire collection of 1026 German LLI and the subset of 386 centenarians were subjected to a gender-matched case-control analysis of five SNPs in the SIRT1 gene. All SNPs were found to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in both cases and controls. No evidence for an association was detected between any of the tested SNPs and the longevity phenotype in either sample, neither at the allele nor at the genotype level. Frequencies of the common five-SNP haplotypes in the SIRT1 gene were identified, but no association between these and exceptional longevity was observed. Neither could we detect association at the single-point allele or genotype levels.Nature, Kaeberlein, M., Mey, M., Guarente, L. "The SIR complex and SIR alone promote longevity in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by two different mechanisms." Genes Dev., Lin, S.J., Defossez, P.A., Guarente, L. "Requirement of NAD and SIR for lifespan extension by calorie restriction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae." Science, Luo, J., Nikolaev, A.Y., Imai, S., Chen, D., Su, F., Shiloh, A., Guarente, L., Gu, W. "Negative control of p by Sir alpha promotes cell survival under stress." Cell, Masoro, E.J. "Caloric restriction and aging: an update." Exp. Gerontol., Motta, M.C., Divecha, N., Lemieux, M., Kamel, C., Chen, D., Gu, W., Bultsma, Y., Murney, M., Guarente, L. "Mammalian SIRT represses forkhead transcription factors." Cell, Nebel, A., Croucher, P.J., Stiegeler, R., Nikolaus, S., Krawczak, M., Schreiber, S. "No association between microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) haplotype and longevity in humans." Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA , Nemoto, S., Fergusson, M.M., Finkel T. "Nutrient availability regulates SIRT through a forkhead-dependent pathway." Science , Onyango P., Celic I., Ma ffery J.M., Boeke J.D., Feinberg A.P. "The htSNP approach employed here is likely to have captured the common variation present in the SIRT1 genomic region for the samples analyzed in this study. By tagging the common variation (haplotypes) within SIRT1, we implicitly assume that any undetected rare variants will be carried by one or other of the common background haplotypes and hence be statistically detectable; this is the logic of the htSNP approach. It is of course possible, albeit unlikely, that the selected markers might not tag the common variation comprehensively, and that rare SIRT1 polymorphisms with a weak impact on the longevity phenotype may exist. Overall, however, our findings would suggest that there is no noteworthy influence of SIRT1 gene variation on exceptional human longevity in the German population. The possibility that this negative association finding results from population stratification in our samples is unlikely. The validity and efficacy of our extensive study population for genetic longevity research have recently been demonstrated (Nebel et al., 2005)." The conserved function of SIRT1 in invertebrates and mammals predicts that the up-regulation of the SIRT1 gene and the subsequent increase in levels of the SIRT1 protein would also exert a life-prolonging effect in humans. In this case, potential mutations affecting the transcription of the gene would be of particular interest. Because the htSNPs used in this study, which are in strong LD, also span the promoter of SIRT1, a significant influence of variation in this regulatory region of the gene may be excluded. However, allelic variants in direct modulators of SIRT1 may be crucial in regulating SIRT1 protein levels. In addition, variation in the broad array of SIRT1 downstream targets could also play critical roles in extending lifespan. In this study, we have demonstrated that common SIRT1 variation does not appear to be associated with exceptional human longevity, despite the fact that the gene is considered an important player in pathways that modulate lifespan in a wide range of organisms, and possibly also in humans. Acknowledgements We would like to thank all probands for their participation. We are grateful to I. Urbach, T. Henke, and T. Wesse for technical assistance. This study was funded by the Federal Ministry of Science and Education through an Explorative Project of the National Genome Research Network (NGFN-2). References Barrett, J.C., Fry, B., Maller, J., Daly, M.J. "Haploview: analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype maps." Bioinformatics 21, 263-265. The SIRT gene, human silent information regulator Sir homologue, and survivorship in the elderly. Exp. Gerontol., Tissenbaum, H.A., Guarente, L. "Increased dosage of a sir-2 gene extends lifespan in Caenorhabditis elegans." Nature, Vaziri, H., Dessain, S.K., Ng Eaton, E., Imai, S.I., Frye, R.A., Pandita, T.K., Guarente, L., Weinberg, R.A. "