inclusion in the study were used: healthy elderly individuals with age over 75 years and no chronic physical or mental diseases, acute infections in the last 4 months, or abnormal hematological and biochemical parameters. The study group consisted of 17 elderly Bulgarians (mean age: 78.9 ± 8.9 years), six male and 11 female, and 23 family members (age range: 18-57 years), nine male and 14 female. The control group consisted of 105 randomly selected healthy controls aged 25-53 years (40 male and 65 female) matched for geographical distribution. For the T-cell subset study, 47 individuals were randomly selected from the total control population. Twenty-one of them were young (mean age: 27.3 ± 2.4 years) and 26 were middle-aged (mean age: 40.4 ± 5.8 years) subjects with a male/female ratio of 1:2 in the two groups.

2.2. HLA and cytokine gene polymorphism

In order to clarify immunogenetic markers contributing to successful aging, HLA and cytokine gene profiles were analyzed in healthy elderly Bulgarians. Family segregation analysis was performed to define the combined effect of haplotypes and immunophenotype profiles.

Genomic DNA was extracted from whole venous blood using the standard proteinase K digestion method followed by salting-out extraction and ethanol precipitation (Miller et al., 1988). HLA class I (HLA-A, -B, and -C) and class II (-DRB, and -DQB1) genotyping was performed by PCR-SSP method using GENOVISION kits.

Gene polymorphism of TNFα, TGFβ1, IL-10, IL-6, and IFNγ was tested by PCR-SSP method with Cytokine Genotyping Tray OneLambda. Eight polymorphisms, previously shown to be associated with the level of cytokine production, were analyzed (Table 1).

3. Results and discussion

The results of this study did not reveal any statistically significant allele and haplotype frequency differences between the elderly and control group. In families with two generations of longevity members, we did not observe HLA alleles and haplotypes associated with autoimmunity.

IL-10 genotype 21082G/A, 2819 C/C, 2592 C/C, related to intermediate production, was positively associated, while genotype 21082A/A, 2819 C/T, 2592 C/A, related to the low level of production, was negatively associated with longevity in Bulgarians. This effect was modulated by IL-6 and IFNγ genotypes associated with the low level of these pro-inflammatory cytokines.

Immunophenotypic studies indicated lower relative and absolute numbers of CD3+8+, CD8+28+, and CD8+57+ cells in elderly people. Analysis in families showed that although most pronounced in the elderly group, lower numbers of CD8+ T cells were also found in middle-aged and young members of the families compared to the age-matched controls. A progressive CD8+28+ cell subsets decline was seen with aging. In addition, we did not observe the immune risk phenotype which is a marker of increased inflammatory activity.

Based on the results of this study, it seems reasonable to suggest that a combination of specific immunogenetic and immunophenotype profiles could contribute to successful aging and maintaining healthy status in elderly individuals.

4. Conclusion

Aging is a complex process determined by genetic and environmental factors. The present study focused on immunogenetic markers contributing to successful aging in healthy elderly Bulgarians. The results suggest that a combination of specific immunogenetic and immunophenotype profiles could contribute to successful aging and maintaining a healthy status in elderly individuals. Further studies are necessary to confirm these findings and to investigate the underlying mechanisms.Family selection criteria were applied, including two generations of longevity members (octogenarians and nonagenarians) with no family history of inherited diseases. A total of 40 individuals were included, consisting of 17 unrelated elderly subjects (age 65-90). Complete blood cell counts were assessed for each subject, and peripheral blood lymphocyte subsets were determined using flow cytometric analysis with a panel of monoclonal antibodies (Becton-Dickinson, USA). Direct four-color immunofluorescence in whole blood was performed according to standard techniques. FACSCalibur flow cytometer, CellQuest and Multitest software (Becton Dickinson, USA) were used for data acquisition and analysis. Results were documented as % positive cells and cells/mm3.

Cytokine gene polymorphism was analyzed to determine the relationship between genotype and level of production. The cytokine gene polymorphism, genotype, and level of production are presented in Table 1. The statistical significance was evaluated using non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test. A P-value lower than 0.05 was considered to indicate a significant difference between groups.

HLA class I and class II allele frequencies were estimated by maximum-likelihood analysis using the Arlequin program v1.1 (Shneider et al., 1996). Standard deviations were calculated from 100 bootstrap iterations. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was tested by two methods: a hidden Markov chain with 100,000 steps implemented in the Arlequin program and a conventional chi-square heterozygosity test. Arlequin software was also used to estimate through an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm maximum-likelihood frequencies of haplotypes defined in family studies.

Comparisons of HLA allele and haplotype frequencies, as well as pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine genotypes between elderly individuals and controls, were performed by chi-square test or Fisher's exact test when appropriate. Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons was applied. For T cell subset analysis, the statistical significance was evaluated using non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test. The differences were not statistically significant after correction of p-values.

HLA-C*02 was not found in the elderly group. Two-loci (HLA-DRB1-DQB1), three-loci (HLA-A-B-C; HLA-A-B-DRB1), and extended (HLA-A-B-C-DRB1-DQB1) haplotypes were defined based on allele inheritance in the families (Fig. 1). Fifty different haplotypes were found in families with longevity members. The majority of these haplotypes were observed also in the control group. Interestingly, haplotypes DRB1*0301-DQB1*02 and DRB1*04 (0401,0402,0404,0405)-DQB1*0302, shown to be predisposing for different autoimmune diseases in the Bulgarian population (Ivanova et al., 2003), were not observed in elderly Bulgarians and their family members.

The most frequent haplotypes in elderly individuals are presented in Table 3. Compared to the controls, an increased frequency was observed for the following haplotypes: A*02-B*35-C*04, A*01-B*08-C*12, A*01-B*35-C*04, A*02-B*35-DRB1*13, A*01-B*08-DRB1*03, A*03-B*35-DRB1*01, A*02-B*35-C*04-DRB1*13-DQB1*06, and A*01-B*08-C*07-DRB1*03-DQB1*02, but a statistical significance was not found after Bonferroni correction. Additionally, the haplotype DRB1*12-DQB1*03 was found only in the elderly individuals (elderly 0.058, controls 0.000).

HLA-A, -B, -C, -DRB1 and -DQB1 allele frequencies in elderly Bulgarians compared to the control group are shown in Table 2. Seventy-three different alleles were found in the present study- 51 (12 HLA-A, 14 HLA-B, 10 HLA-C, 10 DRB1, and 5 DQB1) in elderly and 72 (16 HLA-A, 26 HLA-B, 13 HLA-C, 12 DRB1, 5 DQB1) in the control group. No deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were observed in both groups. The most frequent HLA alleles in elderly Bulgarians were as follows: A*02, *01; B*35, *18, *51; C*07, *04; DRB1*diseases, have been reported to be positively associated with longevity in some populations. In our study, we found a slightly increased frequency of HLA-B*35 and DRB1*12 alleles and corresponding haplotypes in the elderly Bulgarians compared to the control group. This positive association of DRB1*12 with longevity has also been observed in the Japanese population.

Our analysis of cytokine gene polymorphisms showed no statistically significant differences in genotype profile frequencies of pro-inflammatory cytokines TNFa, IL-6, and IFN-g between the elderly and control groups. Similar results were observed for genotype frequencies of anti-inflammatory cytokine TGFb. However, significant differences were found for two genotypes of IL-10. The genotype GCC/ACC, which is associated with intermediate level of IL-10 production, was increased, while the genotype ACC/ATA, which is associated with low level of IL-10 production, was decreased in elderly Bulgarians.

Furthermore, we analyzed cytokine gene profiles to assess the impact of combinations of genotypes associated with different levels of expression. We found that IL-10 (intermediate)- IL-6 (low) and IL-10 (intermediate)-IFNg (low) showed statistically significant increase in elderly Bulgarians compared to the controls. Similar result was observed for gene profile IL-6 (low) - IFNg (low).

In terms of immunophenotype profiles, we observed significantly lower relative and absolute numbers of CD3+8+ cells and CD8+28+ cells in elderly people compared to both middle-aged and young ones. Decreased CD8+57+ cells were also observed in old individuals compared to middle-aged subjects. The lower percentage of CD8+ T cells was more pronounced in individuals aged over 85 years.

Overall, our study suggests that HLA-B*35 and DRB1*12 alleles and corresponding haplotypes, as well as certain cytokine gene polymorphisms and immunophenotype profiles, may play a role in successful aging in the Bulgarian population. However, further studies with larger sample sizes are needed to confirm these findings.Viral infections were shown to be increased in centenarians. Additionally, it has been suggested that HLA/longevity associations are population-specific. The Bulgarian population is relatively homogeneous, and based on HLA class I and class II profiles, it is characterized by features of the Southern European anthropological type with some influence from additional ethnic groups (Ivanova et al., 2001, 2002). Therefore, Bulgarians have a consistent healthy immune status in our study group. In the present study, it was shown that IL-10 genotype 21082G/A, 2819 C/C, 2592 C/C related to intermediate production was positively associated. At the same time, genotype 21082A/A, 2819 C/T, 2592 C/A related to low levels of production was negatively associated with longevity in Bulgarians. These results confirm data showing that longevity is associated with genotypes coding for an anti-inflammatory profile (Lio et al., 2002; Bonafe et al., 2001). Recent data indicated that a pro-inflammatory profile is associated with increased mortality in elderly individuals (Franceschi et al., 2000). Additionally, our study on cytokine gene profiles demonstrated that the effect of IL-10 gene polymorphism is modulated by IL-6 and IFNg genotypes associated with a low level of production of these pro-inflammatory cytokines. In generations of longevity members, we did not observe HLA alleles and haplotypes associated with autoimmunity. Our data also indicate an association of longevity with genotypes coding for an anti-inflammatory cytokine profile. In addition, we did not observe the immune risk phenotype which is a marker of increased inflammatory activity. Based on the results of this study, it seems reasonable to suggest that a combination of specific immunogenetic and immunophenotype profiles could contribute to successful aging and maintaining a healthy status in the elderly.

Acknowledgements: The authors are grateful to the volunteers for making this study possible. This investigation has been done within ImAginE and was supported in part by a research grant from T-CIA project N-QLK6-CT-2002-02283.

References:

Akisaka, M., Suzuki, M., Okinawa Longevity Study. Molecular genetic analysis of HLA genes in the very old. Nippon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi, Amadori, A., Zamarchi, R., De Silvestro, G., Forza, G., Cavatton, G., Danieli, G.A., Clementi, M., Chiecobianchi, L., Genetic control of the CD/CD T-cell ratio in humans. Nat. Med., Awad, M.R., El-Gamel, A., Simm, E., Hasleton, P., Yonan, N., Deiraniya, A.K., Sinnott, P.J., Hutchinson, I.V., Genotype variations in the transforming growth factor-beta gene: an association with TGF-b production, fibrotic lung disease and graft fibrosis after lung transplantation. Transplantation(), Azuma, M., Cayabyab, M., Philips, J.H., Lanier, L.L., Requirements for CD-dependent T cell-mediated cytotoxicity. J. Immunol.(), Bidwell, J., Keen, L., Gallagher, G., Kimberly, R., Huizinga, T., Mermott, M.F., Oksenberg, J., Micholl, J., Pociot, F., Hardt, C., DAlfonso S. Cytokine gene polymorphism in human disease: on-line databases. Genes Immunity(), Bonafé M et al. A gender-dependent genetic predisposition to produce high levels of IL-10 is detrimental for longevity. Eur J Immunol(), Bruunsgaard H. Aging and proinflammatory cytokines. Curr Opin Hematol.(), Caruso, C., Candore, G., Romano, G., Lio, D., Bonafé M., Valensin, S., Franceschi, C., HLA, aging, and longevity: a critical reappraisal. Hum Immunol.(), Clementi, M., Forabosco, P., Amadori, A., Zamarchi, R., De Silvestro, G., Di Gianantonio, E., Chieco-Bianchi, L., Tenconi, R. CD and T lymphocyte inheritance: evidence for major autosomal genes. Hum Genet.(), E. Naumova et al. / Experimental Gerontology 39 (2004) 637644 E et al. Polymorphic haplotypes of the interleukin-10 5 flanking determine variable interleukine-10 transcription and are associated particular phenotypes of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheumrejection. Transplantation, 

Retroviruses and disease. Rev. G., Frasca, D., Genes, immunity, and senescence: looking for a link. Immunol. Rev., 

R., Boucher, N., Porter, V., Zhu, X., Spaulding, C.C., Walford, Kronenberg, M., Cohen, D., Schachter, F.F., Decline in CD4 T cells in centenarians and in long-term T cell cultures: a possible role for both in vivo and in vitro immunosenescence. Exp. Gerontol., 

W.B., Keller, E.T., Age-associated increase in gene expression, late-life diseases, and frailty. Annu. Rev. Med., 

F.F., Vescovini, R., Mazzola, M., Bologna, G., Nigro, Lavagetto, G., Franceschi, C., Passeri, M., Sansoni, P., of cytotoxic CD4+ CD8- T cells in healthy aging people and centenarians. Immunology ( ), 

F.G., Immune parameters in a longitudinal study of an old population of Swedish people: a comparison between survivors and non-survivors. J. Gerontol. A ( ), 

B.D., Faulds, G., Jeffery, R., Mohamed-Ali, V., Yudkin, Humphries, S., Woo, P., Effect of novel polymorphisms in interleukin-1 (IL-1) gene on IL-1 transcription and plasma IL-1 and an association with System-onset juvenile chronic arthritis. J. Invest. , 

C., Bonafe, M., Valensin, S., Olivieri, F., De Luca, Ottaviani, E., De Benedictis G., Inflamm-aging: a perspective on immunosenescence. Annu. NY Acad. Sci., 

M.A., Norman, P.J., Thiel, B., Tiwari, H., Peiffer, A., Vaughan, Prescott, S., Leppert, M., Schork, N.J., Lanchbury, J.S., Quantitative trait loci on chromosomes 6, 8, 9, 14, 15, 19, 20, and 21 control variation in levels of T and B lymphocyte subpopulations. J. Hum. Genet., 

N., Bidwell, J.L., Smith, A.J.P., Keen, L.J., Gallagher, Kimberly R., Huizinga T., Mermott M.F., Oksenberg M icholl J., Pociot F., Hardt C., DAlfonso S., Gene polymorphism in human disease: online databases. Immunity (Supplement ), 

D.R., Pirskanen R., Matell G., Lefvert A.K., Tumor necrosis factor-alpha polymorphism and secretion in myasthenia gravis. J. Neuroimmunol., 

R., Henon N., Lepage V., Charron D., Vicaut E., Schachter HLA-DR alleles display sex-dependent effects on survival and discriminate between individual and familial longevity. Hum. Genet. , 

M., Spassova P., Michailova A., Naumova E.. Distribution of HLA class I alleles and haplotypes in Bulgarians: contribution to understanding the origin of the population. Antigens , 

M.. Rozemuller E.. Tyufekchiev N.. Michailova A.. Tilanus Naumova E.. HLA polymorphism in Bulgarians defined by high-resolution typing methods in comparison with other populations. Tissue Antigens , 

Ivanova M.. Michailova S.. Michailova A.. Nedialkova A.. Naumova E.. Molecular model for HLA class II associations in common autoimmune diseases. Genes Immunity, 

Kroeger K.M., Steer J.H., Joyce D.A., Abraham L.J., Effects of stimulus and cell type on the expression of the -308 tumor necrosis factor promoter polymorphism. Cytokine, 

Lagaay A.M., DAmaro J., Ligthart G.J., Schreuder G.M., van Rood J.J., Hijmans W., Longevity and heredity in humans: association with the human leucocyte antigen phenotype. Annu. NY Acad. Sci., 

Lio D., Scola L., Crivello A., Bonafe M., Franceschi C., Olivieri F., Colonna-Romano G., Candore G., Caruso C.. Allele frequencies of T- . A single nucleotide polymorphism at the first intron of interferon-gamma gene in a group of Italian centenarians. Exp. GerontolRejection. Transplantation, Volpato, S., Gyralink, J.M., Ferrucci, L., Balfour, J., Chaves, P., Fried, L.P., Harris, T.B. Cardiovascular disease, interleukin and the risk of mortality in older women: the Women's Health and Aging study. Circulation. 

Wikby, A., Maxson, P., Olsson, J., Johansson, B., Ferguson, F.G. Changes in CD4 and CD8 lymphocyte subsets, T-cell proliferation responses and non-survival in the very old: The Swedish longitudinal OCTO immune study. Mech. Aging Dev. 

Wikby, A., Johansson, B., Olsson, J., Lofgren, S., Nilsson, B., Ferguson, F. Expansion of peripheral blood CD8 T lymphocyte subpopulations and an association with cytomegalovirus seropositivity in the elderly: The Swedish NONA immune study. Exp. Gerontol.