Experimental Gerontology 39 (2004) 629-635 www.elsevier.com/locate/expgero polymorphisms PON1 192 and 55 and longevity in Italian centenarians and Irish nonagenarians. A pooled analysis, a,* b b b c Irene M. Rea, Pascal P. McKeown, Dorothy McMaster, Ian S. Young, Chris Patterson, d b e e Maurice J. Savage, Christine Belton, Francesca Marchegiani, Fabiola Olivieri, f f Massimiliano Bonafe, Claudio Franceschi a Department of Geriatric Medicine, Queens University of Belfast, Whitla Medical Building, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast BT7 9AB b Department of Medicine, Queens University of Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom c Epidemiology, Queens University of Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom d Child Health, Queens University of Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom e Italian National Research Centres on Aging, Ancona, Italy Received 5 August 2003; received in revised form 8 October 2003; accepted 21 November 2003 Abstract Background: PON1 is an arylesterase associated with high-density lipoprotein (HDL) that protects low-density lipoprotein (LDL) against oxidative modification. Common polymorphisms PON1 55 (L/M) and 192 (Q/R) in the PON1 gene are associated with atherosclerosis and heart disease. Because long-lived people seem protected from premature vascular death, we conducted a pooled statistical analysis to assess any association between these polymorphisms and longevity in a large combined group of Italian centenarians and octo/nonagenarians from two large cohorts of very elderly subjects - centenarians in Italy and octo/nonagenarians from the Belfast Elderly Longitudinal Free-living Ageing Study (BELFAST) in Northern Ireland.

Materials and methods: Separated DNA was available from 1479 subjects from Italy and Northern Ireland (NI). In Italy, 308 (males 67, females 241, mean age 100.8, SD 2.1 years) and 579 young controls (males 347, females 232, mean age 40.7, SD 12.7 years) included in the study. In NI, 296 octo/nonagenarians (males 92, females 204, mean age (mean age 13.0, SD 1.4 years) had available DNA. PON1 55 (L/M) and 192 (Q/R) polymorphisms were studied using a PCR-RFLP approach.

Results: There was a significant difference in PON1 192 genotypes in Italian centenarians compared to younger controls (X2 = 6.8; df = 2; p = 0.03) and a similar but non-significant trend between octo/nonagenarian and young subjects in NI (X2 = 4.0; df = 2; p = 0.14). Using logistic regression analysis on the combined Italian and Irish datasets, there was a small survival advantage for centenarian and octo/nonagenarian subjects who were heterozygous for PON1 192 R allele (OR 1.3, CI 1-1.6; p = 0.04) with a stepwise increase for RR homozygous subjects (OR 1.7, CI 1.1-2.6; p = 0.02), compared to QQ subjects. Comparing R and Q alleles, there was a survival advantage for octo/nonagenarian/centenarian subjects who carried the R allele (OR1.3, CI1.1-1.5; p = 0.007), but there was no sex-specific effect (p = 0.77). LL, LM, and MM genotypes of PON 55 polymorphisms showed similar frequencies in Italy (39.9, 47.0, 13.1%) and Ireland (39.5, 48.6, 11.9%) with no age or sex-related differences. The PON1 192R/Q and PON55L/M loci were in strong linkage disequilibrium with a Lewontins D0 coefficient -0.928 (elderly) and -0.965 (young). There was a significant difference in haplotype frequency of these linked loci in older compared to younger subjects (Likelihood Ratio X2 = 9.60; df = 3; p = 0.02).

Conclusion: These data suggest a modest association between the 192R allele and longevity in two very elderly populations in two European countries. Being homozygous for 192 RR further enhances survival advantage but this effect was not found to be sex-specific.analysis of I.M. Rea et al. / Experimental Gerontology 39 (2004) 629-635 

3. Results 

DNA samples were digested with 10 U Hsp92II (Promega, Southampton, UK), and the PON1 192 product (99 bp) was digested with 8 U Alw1 (New England Biolabs, Hitchin, UK) at 37°C for 16 h. The samples were then resolved on a 3% agarose gel and visualized by UV after ethidium bromide staining. Alleles L (leucine) and M (methionine) for the PON1 55 position were assigned based on the presence of a 170 bp (undigested) fragment and 126 and 44 bp (digested) fragments, respectively. Alleles Q (glutamine) and R (arginine) for the PON1 192 position were assigned based on the presence of a 99 bp (undigested) fragment and 69 and 30 bp (digested) fragments, respectively. Control DNA samples with known genotypes were included within each run to ensure accurate genotype assignation. There was no significant deviation of PON1 192 and 55 genotype frequencies from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium within age groups and countries.

3.1. Genotype-based analysis 

Table 1 shows a comparison of PON1 192 and 55 genotype distributions for centenarians from Italy and octo/nonagenarians from Northern Ireland versus their young controls. There was a significant difference between PON1 192 genotypes in Italy for centenarian and young subjects, with a greater proportion of QR heterozygotes among the older Italians.

Polymerase chain reactions were performed using primer sequences derived from published data specific for the amplification of regions surrounding codon 192 and codon 55 sites (Humbert et al., 1993). The amplification reactions and methodologies have been previously described (Bonafe et al., 2002). Some genotypes at both loci were confirmed by direct sequencing of amplified DNA fragments with the automatic sequencer (ABI PRISM 310, Perkins Elmer Biosystems).

Table 1: Comparison of PON1 192 and 55 genotype and allele numbers and frequencies for centenarians in Italy and octo/nonagenarians from Northern Ireland versus young controls 

3.2. Allele-based analysis 

Table 1 also shows a comparison of PON1 192 and 55 allele frequencies for both Italy and Northern Ireland for very old and young groups. Comparing Q and R alleles of PON1 192, there were significant differences between the centenarian and young age groups from Italy with similar but non-significant changes in Northern Ireland. In keeping with the genotype-based analysis, the R allele frequency increased by about 45% in old compared to young subjects. Table 1 shows similar frequencies for PON1 55 L and M alleles in Italy and Northern Ireland with no significant differences between age groups.

3.3. Statistical analysis 

To increase the number of observations being examined, providing more vigorous testing of the original hypothesized relationships among the variables (Taioli and Bonassi, 2003), gene polymorphisms for PON1 192 and 55 were coded in both Italy and Ireland according to standard nomenclature (Humbert et al., 1993). All data received and included in the datasets were anonymous. Deviation of genotype frequencies from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was tested by a chi-square goodness of fit test.

3.3.1. Genotype analysis 

Logistic regression was used to compare PON1 192 genotypes while adjusting for any confounding influence of country or gender. In Table 2, the results show a significant stepwise elevation in odds ratio associated with the QR genotype 1.29 (CI, 1.01-1.65; p = 0.04) and the RR genotype 1.68 (CI, 1.08-2.62; p = 0.02), relative to the QQ genotype. When logistic regression was used to compare the PON 55 LL, LM, and MM genotypes between age groups, there was no significant effect. There was no interaction between country and PON1 192 (X2 = 2.04; df = 2; p = 0.36) or PON 55 (X2 = 3.91; df = 2; p = 0.14) genotypes, providing no evidence of heterogeneity between Italy and Northern Ireland in the association between PON1 192 and longevity.

Table 3 shows the possible genotype combinations for PON1 192 and PON 55 and subject numbers in each genotype combination since there was evidence from the typingThe effect of the carriage of the R allele in nonagenarian and centenarian subjects is unclear, particularly since carriers of the R allele have been shown to be at risk of increased cardiovascular disease earlier in life in many, but not all, studies (Mackness et al., 2001). In younger people, the mechanism has been related to the reduced ability of R allele carriers to protect their LDL cholesterol from damaging oxidation (Aviram et al., 1999; Mackness et al., 1997a). Interestingly, several studies have noted a decrease in the effect of PON1 192 with age in cardiovascular-related studies, which is so far unexplained (Senti et al., 2001; Leviev et al., 2002), though Mackness et al. (2003) suggest that risk factors for a multifactorial disease like atherosclerosis may become diluted with age. A further argument against an important cardiovascular mechanism for PON1 in survival comes from the separate analysis by sex, which showed no evidence that sex differentially enhanced longevity between male and female subjects.

Pooled analysis of Italian and Irish data in this study allowed us to increase the number of subjects being examined and provided more vigorous testing of the original hypothesis that there might be attrition of the PON1 gene variants in the oldest age groups. Additionally, it allowed us to perform an analysis of the effect of sex, which had not been specifically evaluated in either study (Taioli and Bonassi, 2003). Contrary to intuition, we demonstrated a modest increase in the frequency of carriage of the R allele of the PON1 192 gene between centenarian and octo/nonagenarian subjects and their young controls in the pooled data from Italy and Northern Ireland. This finding was independent of the country of origin and sex. The oldest subjects in both Italy and Ireland demonstrated an increased frequency of the PON1 192 R allele, and this effect increased stepwise when the oldest subjects were homozygous for the R allele. When compared to younger subjects in either Ireland or Italy, surviving octo/nonagenarians in Ireland and centenarians in Italy had an increased chance of carrying either one copy of the PON1 192 R allele (odds ratio 1.3) or two copies of the R allele (odds ratio 1.7).

In some previous studies in the oldest subject groups, there has been a documented attrition in the frequency of genes associated with earlier mortality, though this has not always been the case. In the most consistent finding, several groups have demonstrated that ApoE4, associated with hypercholesterolaemia, premature atherosclerosis and late-onset Alzheimer's disease (Katzman, 1994), is significantly less frequent in their populations of centenarians or nonagenarians compared to control groups, whereas ApoE2 frequency is increased (Schachter et al., 1994; Kervinen et al., 1994; Jian-Gang et al., 1998; Frisoni et al., 1991; Rea et al., 2001). The findings in this study would seem to suggest that carriage of the PON1 192R allele is associated with a modest increased chance of survival into very old age. In the only other study to date of PON1 192 polymorphisms in longevity, Heijmans et al. (2000) in the Leiden .85 study also reported a similar finding.

Although the R allele has been credited with enhancing LDL oxidation and reducing HDL protective effect, it also produces higher levels of paraxonase activity in serum (Blatter Garin et al., 1994), the effect of which is largely unknown. Interestingly, Europeans tend to have a bimodal paraoxonase activity with high or low activity subjects and a preponderance of low activity subjects. Conversely, Asian and Oriental populations have a preponderance of high paraoxonase activity subjects (Gledmacher et al., 1988), and it is food for thought that Japan currently has the longest life expectancy in the world. Recently, Kuremoto et al. (2003) reported that the RR genotype of PON1 was more protective against lipoprotein oxidation and CHD in Japanese subjects.

Several groups have postulated that polymorphisms in genes responsible for the metabolism of xenobiotics may influence longevity by determining the susceptibility of an individual to environmental influences. However, no association has been found to date between human longevity and genetic polymorphisms in several drug-metabolising enzymes, including NAT2, GSTM1, CYP2D6, and CYP2E1 (Muiras et al., 1998; Agundez et al., 1997; Bathum et al., 1998; Playfer et al., 1977cardiovascular disease. Toxicol. Environ. Chem., Hasselwander, O., Savage, D.A., Master, D., Loughrey, C.M., Mamee, P.T., Middleton, D., Nicholls, D.P., Maxwell, A.P., Young, I.S., Paraoxonase polymorphisms are not associated with cardiovascular risk in renal transplant recipients. Kidney Int., References are important in order to maximize the quality of life of elderly people. Longevity is a complex trait resulting from the interaction between multiple genetic and environmental factors. At the beginning of this study, we had hypothesized that the 192R allele, in view of its association with CHD, would be less frequent in very elderly survivors such as centenarians and nonagenarians compared to younger control populations. However, counterintuitively we found that the 192R allele frequency was modestly enriched in the oldest survivors and that there was no sex-specific influence, which seemed to argue against a cardiovascular-related mechanism of effect. The 192R allele is associated with high PON activity using paraoxon as a substrate and it may be that this allele does afford additional protection against various environmental toxins or damaging oxidative stress situations. It is well recognized that association studies may be subject to spurious results, particularly because of small numbers of cases and controls, lack of an appropriate control group, poorly defined phenotype, and population admixture. We believe that these issues are less important in our study as the findings appear similar across two European countries and the number of subjects in the very oldest cohort and their control groups is large. An alternative explanation is that the 192R allele is in linkage disequilibrium with a functional neighboring gene awaiting identification. Further work will be required to elucidate more precisely the role of paraoxonase in human biology and to see if our findings can be replicated in other independent populations or in a Northern European Heart Project. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. (Suppl.), SS Bub, A., Barth, S., Watzl, B., Briviba, K., Herbert, B.M., Luhrmann, P.M., Neuhauser-Berthold, J., Rechkemmer, G., Paraoxonase Q- polymorphism is associated with reduced lipid peroxidation in R-allele-carrier but not in QQ homozygous elderly subjects on a tomato-rich diet. Eur. J. Nutr., Davies, H.G., Richter, R.J., Keifer, M., Broomfield, C.A., Sowalla, J., Furlong, C.E., The effect of the human serum paraoxonase polymorphism is reversed with diaoxon, soman and sarin. Nat. Genet., Durrington, P.N., Mackness, B., Mackness, M.I., The hunt for nutritional and pharmacological modulators of Paraoxonase. Atherosclerosis Thromb. Vasc. Biol., Frisoni, G.B., Louhija, J., Geroldi, C., Trabucchi, M., Longevity and the epsilon allele of apolipoprotein E: the Finnish Centenarians Study. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci., Fuhrman, B., Aviram, M., Preservation of paraoxonase activity by wine flavonoids: possible role in the protection of LDL from lipid peroxidation. Ann. NY Acad. Sci., Garin, M.-C., James R.W., Dussoix, P., Blanche H., Passa P., Froguel P., Ruiz J.l.; Paraoxonase polymorphism Met-Leu is associated with modified serum concentrations of the enzyme. J. Clin. Invest., Gledmacher, V., Mallinckrodt, M., Diepgen, T.L., The human paraoxonase polymorphism and specificity. Toxicol. Environ. Chem., Hasselwander, O., Savage, D.A., Master, D., Loughrey, C.M., Mamee, P.T., Middleton, D., Nicholls, D.P., Maxwell, A.P., Young, I.S.; Paraoxonase polymorphisms are not associated with cardiovascular risk in renal transplant recipients. Kidney Int., Acknowledgments: Dr. Rea thanks General Practitioner colleagues, the patients, and Ms. Anne Murphy, research nurse for dedicated work in the community. I.M. Rea et al./Experimental Gerontology 39 (2004) 629-635 Miller, S.A., Dykes, D.D., Polesky H.F.; A simple procedure for extracting DNA from human nucleated cells. Nucleic Acids Res., Muiras M.-L., Verasdonck P., Cottet F.,coronary artery disease in Japanese subjects. J. Atheroscler. Thromb., Leviev, H., Poirier, O., Nicaud, V., Evans, A., Kee, F., Arveile, D., Morrison, C., Cambien, F., James, R.W., High expressor paraxonase PON gene promoter polymorphisms are associated with a reduced risk of vascular disease in younger coronary patients. Atherosclerosis, Mackness, M.I., Arrol, S., Abbott, C.A., Durrington, P.N., Protection of low-density lipoprotein against oxidative modification by high-density lipoprotein-associated paraoxonase. Atherosclerosis, Mackness, M.I., Arrol, S., Mackness, B., Durrington, P.N., Alloenzymes of paraoxonase and the effectiveness of high-density lipoproteins in protecting low-density lipoprotein against lipid peroxidation. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., Jiang-Gang, Z., Yong-Xing, M., Chuan-Fu, W., Pei-Fang Li., Song-Bai Nui-Fan G., Guo-Yin F., Lin H. Apolipoprotein E longevity among Han Chinese population. Mech. Ageing Dev., Kao Y.L., Donaghue K., Chan A., Knight J., Silink A.. An association of paraoxonase PON gene is associated with diabetic retinopathy IDDM. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., Katzman R.. Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer's disease. Curr. Neurobiol., Kervinen K., Savolainen M.J.. Salokannel J.. Hynninen A.. Heikkinen Ehnholm C.. Koistinen M.J.. Kesaniemi Y.A.. E and B polymorphisms-longevity factors assessed in Atherosclerosis, Kuremoto K., Watanabe Y., Ohmura H., Shimada K., Mokuno Daida H.. R/R genotype of human paraoxonase (PON) is protective against lipoprotein oxidation and coronary artery disease in Japanese subjects. J. Atheroscler. Thromb., Leviev H., Poirier O., Nicaud V., Evans A., Kee F.. Arveile, Morrison C., Cambien F., James R.W.. High paraxonase PON gene promoter polymorphisms are associated with a reduced risk of vascular disease in younger coronary patients. Atherosclerosis, Mackness M.I.. Arrol S.. Abbott C.A.. Durrington P.N. Lipoprotein-associated paraoxonase. Atherosclerosis, Mackness M.I.. Arrol S.. Mackness B.. Durrington P.N.. Alloenzymes of paraoxonase and the effectiveness of lipoproteins in protecting low-density lipoprotein against peroxidation. Lancet, Mackness B., Mackness M.I., Arrol S., Turkie W., Durrington B. Effect of the molecular polymorphisms of human PON on the rate of hydrolysis of paraxon. Br. J. Pharmacol., Mackness B., Mackness M.I., Arrol S., Turkie W., Durrington Effect of the human serum paraoxonase and polymorphisms on the protection by high-density lipoprotein low-density lipoprotein oxidative modification. FEBS Lett., Mackness B., Davies G.K., Turkie W.. Lee E.. Roberts D.H.. Hill Roberts C.. Durrington P.N.. Mackness M.I.. Paraoxonase in coronary heart disease. Atheroscl. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., Mackness B., Durrington P., Meldrum P., Yarnell J., Azam N., Mackness M.. Low paraxonase activity predicts