Experimental Gerontology 39 (2004) 1095-1100 www.elsevier.com/locate/expgero Specific association of genetic variation in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)g-2 with longevity Michelangela, Massimiliano, Maria Rosaria, Emilia, Fabiola Olivierib, Francesca Marchegianib, Claudio Franceschib, Giuseppe Paolissoa,* a Department of Geriatric Medicine and Metabolic Diseases, VI Divisione di Medicina Interna, II University of Piazza Miraglia 2, I-80138 Naples, Italy b Department of Experimental Pathology, University of Bologna, via S. Giacomo 12, 40126 Bologna. Received 21 November 2003; received in revised form 19 March 2004; accepted 23 March 2004 Long-lived subjects have been shown to have peculiar anthropometric features (i.e. lower body mass index (BMI)) and metabolic parameters (i.e. improved insulin sensitivity). Lifestyle and a genetic background potentially protective against age-related metabolic derangement might contribute to such a particular phenotype. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)g-2 is an important regulator of adipose tissue metabolism, insulin sensitivity and inflammatory response. Thus, the potential role of genetic variability at Pro/Ala loci of PPARG gene on longevity was studied in 222 long-lived subjects and 250 aged subjects. We found a different Pro/Ala genotype frequency distribution between long-lived and aged male subjects; long-lived men had an increased frequency of Pro/Ala genotype (20% vs. 8.5%). No differences were found when allele and genotype distribution of Pro/Ala gene polymorphism were analyzed in the two age groups of women. Interestingly, subjects with Pro/Ala polymorphism had significantly lower BMI than Ala/Ala and Pro/Pro polymorphism. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that paraoxonase Pro/Ala gene polymorphism is associated with human longevity. Such an effect is probably due to the effect of Pro/Ala polymorphism on body composition and appears to be gender-specific. q 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. Keywords: PPARg; Pro12Ala gene polymorphism; Human longevity; Aging body composition 1. Introduction The anthropometric and metabolic derangement found in aged subjects (Paolisso et al., 1995). Lifestyle and a genetic background potentially protective against age-related metabolic derangement might contribute to the lower body mass index (BMI) and improved insulin sensitivity found among long-lived subjects. Several recent intriguing studies in Caucasian long-lived subjects have highlighted the role of biological factors as a determinant of successful aging (Paolisso, 2000) and have demonstrated that, starting from young to very old subjects, aging is associated with progressive remodeling (Paolisso, 2000). Such age-remodeling mainly affects anthropometric, endocrine and metabolic factors such as plasma lipid profile and insulin action. So far, long-lived subjects have been shown to have peculiar anthropometric features and metabolic parameters. In particular, it has been shown that long-lived subjects are less prone to Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) are members of the nuclear hormone receptor subfamily of ligand-dependent transcription factors (Spiegelman, 1998). At the molecular level, PPARs act by binding to the promoter region as a heterodimer with the receptor for 9-cis-retinoic acid, and these heterodimers regulate the transcription of genes involved in lipid and glucose metabolism (Kersten et al., 2000) There are currently three known subtypes of PPARs: PPARa, PPARd, and PPARg (Kersten et al., 2000). The isoform PPARg2 is mainly expressed in adipose tissue (Kersten et al., 2000) where it modulates the expression of target genes involved in adipocyte differentiation (Elbrecht et al., 1996), insulin sensitivity, and inflammatory processes (Lemberger et al., 1996a,b; Blanquart et al., 2003; Ricote et al., 1998, 1999; Plutzky, 2003). This receptor is also the target of the thiazolidinedione class of insulin-sensitizing drugs that are used to treat insulin resistance (Olefsky, 2000). Within normal range, according to American Diabetes Association criteria (Alberti and Zimmet, 1998), all subjects were neither diabetic nor affected by impaired fasting glucose. No subject used drugs that affect insulin secretion and/or action or plasma lipid levels. In particular, long-lived subjects represented a group of carefully selected individuals free of major age-related diseases. After a, has been extensively studied in relation to BMI and insulin sensitivity. However, previous studies have yielded inconsistent findings on the association between the Ala allele and BMI. Our study found that the Pro/Ala genotype is associated with lower BMI and a trend towards lower insulin resistance degree. Nevertheless, caution in interpreting the data is necessary due to the large standard deviation of BMI in all study groups.

The allele frequency and genotype distribution of the Pro/Ala gene polymorphism did not differ significantly between long-lived and aged subjects, but a higher frequency of Pro/Ala genotype was found in long-lived men. This suggests that individuals genetically predisposed to lower BMI may have an advantage in reaching extreme lifespan limits. Interestingly, gender differences in the association of PPARG gene polymorphism with dyslipidemia, insulin sensitivity, and BMI have been documented previously.

PPAR- gamma is an important regulator of adipose tissue metabolism, insulin sensitivity, and inflammatory response. PPAR-gamma ligands have been shown to reverse the major defect of insulin resistance syndrome and to inhibit atherosclerosis, improve endothelial cell function, and attenuate inflammation. The effect of PPARg locus on survival may be explained by the central role of obesity as a major risk factor for age-related disorders such as hypertension, CAD, dyslipidemias, and type 2 diabetes.

In conclusion, our study demonstrates that genetic variation in PPARG-2 is associated with human longevity through its effect on body composition. The Pro/Ala genotype appears to be gender-specific in its association with BMI and insulin resistance degree. Our results highlight the importance of genetic factors in determining human longevity and suggest potential targets for intervention in age-related disorders.The article discusses the association of PPARG genotype with obesity and type 2 diabetes and its effect on longevity. Previous studies have investigated this association in different populations, but the results suggest that survival selection through Pro/Ala locus is differentially affected in males and females. The sex-specific association of longevity with alleles or genotypes of several genes related to risk factors for age-related diseases, including PPARG genotype, is not unexpected based on previous studies on the genetics of longevity in centenarians. Despite the finding that several genes have been found associated with longevity in both genders, different findings in males and females have been observed in previous gene/longevity association studies, pointing out that gender is a major variable in the genetics of longevity and suggesting that men and women follow different strategies to reach longevity. To this regard, it has been hypothesized that female centenarians are more likely to reach 100 years of age because of a more favorable environmental condition and a healthier lifestyle.

The Pro/Ala variant in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG) has been extensively investigated for association with obesity in two Caucasian populations. Diabetes Blanquart et al. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors: regulation of transcriptional activities and roles in inflammation. J. Steroid Biochem. Biol. The effect of Pro/Ala polymorphism on body composition appears to be gender-specific, which suggests that it affects human longevity.

Intriguingly, the fact that longevity is associated with an increased heterozygosity at PPARG locus is in agreement with previous findings suggesting a survival advantage for heterozygotes. Loss of heterozygosity is frequent in a number of non-endocrine tumors and in a few endocrine tumors, and its presence can correlate with tumor aggressiveness and survival. Naturally, caution must be exercised in interpreting these novel findings.

In conclusion, the study demonstrated that paraoxonase Pro/Ala gene polymorphism is associated with human longevity. Such an effect is probably due to the effect of Pro/Ala polymorphism on body composition and appears to be gender-specific.

Alberti, K.G.M.M., Zimmet, P.Z., for the WHO Consultation, Definition, diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus and its complications. Part 1: diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus. Provisional report of a WHO consultation. Diabet. Med. Altshuler, D., Hirschhorn, J.N., Klannemark, M., Lindgren, C.M., Vohl, M.C., Nemesh, J., Lane, C.R., Schaffner, S.F., Bolk, S., Brewer, C., Tuomi, T., Gaudet, D., Hudson, T.J., Daly, M., Groop, L., Lander, E.S., The common PPAR Pro12Ala polymorphism is associated with decreased risk of type 2 diabetes. Nat. Genet. Ellerhorst et al. HLA class II haplotypes favorable outcomes for renal cell carcinoma treated with therapy. J. Urol.

Plutzky J. The potential role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors on inflammation in type 2 diabetes mellitus and atherosclerosis. Am J Cardiol.

Puca et al. A genome-wide scan for linkage to human exceptional longevity identifies a locus on chromosome 4. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA.

Ricote et al. The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPARgamma) is a negative regulator of macrophage activation. Nature.

Ristow et al. Obesity associated with a mutation in a genetic regulator of adipocyte differentiation. N. Engl. J. Med.

Rosmond et al. The Pro12Ala PPARgamma2 gene missense mutation is associated with obesity and insulin resistance in Swedish middle-aged men. Diabetes Metab. Res. Rev.on aging and longevity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. ( ), Schneider, J., Kreuzer, J., Hamann, A., Nawroth, P.P., Dugi, K.A., The proline-alanine substitution in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma gene is associated with lower lipoprotein lipase activity in vivo. Diabetes ( ), Spiegelman, B.M., PPARg: adipogenic regulator and thiazolidinedione receptor. Diabetes, Thatcher, A.R., Kannisto, V., Vaupel, J.W., The Forces of Mortality at Age to , Odense Monographs on Population Aging, vol. Odense University Press. Valve, R., Sivenius, K., Miettinen, R., Pihlajamaki, J., Rissanen, A., Deeb, S.S., Auwerx, J., Uusitupa, M., Laakso, M., Two polymorphisms in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gene are associated with severe overweight among obese women. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. ( ), Yashin, A.I., De Benedictis, G., Vaupel, J.W., Tan, Q., Andreev, K.F., Iachine, I.A., Bonafe`, M., De Luca, M., Valensin, S., Carotenuto, L., Franceschi, C., Genes, demography and life span: the contribution of demographic data and genetic studies on aging and longevity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. ( ), Yen, C.J., Beamer, B.A., Negri, C., Silver, K., Brown, K.A., Yarnall, D.P., Burns, D.K., Roth,J.Shauldiner,A.R., Molecular scanning of the human peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR gamma) gene in diabetic Caucasians: identification of a Pro-Ala PPAR gamma missense mutation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. ( ), Zietz, B., Barth, N., Spiegel, D., Schmitz, G., Scholmerich, J., Schaffler,A., A Pro-Ala polymorphism in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) is associated with higher levels of total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol in male Caucasian type diabetes patients. Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes ( ), M. Barbieri et al./Experimental Gerontology 39 (2004) 1095-1100 The organization, promoter analysis, and expression of the human PPARgamma gene. J. Biol. Chem. ( ), Franceschi, C., Motta, L., Valensin, S., Rapisarda, R., Franzone, A., Berardelli,Motta,Monti,D.,Bonafe`,M.,Ferrucci,L.,Deiana,L.,Pes,G.M.,Carru,C.,Desole,M.S.,Barbi,C.,Sartoni,G.,Gemelli,C.,Lescai,F.,Olivieri,F.,
Marchegiani,F.,Cardelli,M.,Cavallone,L.,Gueresi,P.,Cossarizza,A.,
Troiano,L.,Pini,G.,Sansoni,P.passeri,G.Lisa,R.Spazzafumo,L.,
Amadio,L.Giunta,S.Stecconi,R.Morresi,R.Viticchi,C.Mattace,R.,
De Benedictis, G., Baggio, G., Do men and women follow different trajectories to reach extreme longevity? Aging Clin. Exp. Res.( ), Gerkins,V.R.Ting,A.,Menck,H.T.,Casagrande,J.T.,Terasaki,P.I.,
Pike,M.C.,Henderson,B.E.,HLA heterozygosity as a genetic marker of long-term survival. J. Natl Cancer Inst. ( ), Hasstedt,S.J.,Ren,Q.-F.,Teng,K.,Elbein,S.C.,Effect of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-Pro-Ala variant on obesity, glucose homeostasis, and blood pressure in members of familial Type diabetic kindreds. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. ( ), Ho, W.L., Chang, J.W., Tseng, R.C., Chen, J.T., Chen, C.Y., Jou, Y.S., Wang, Y.C., Loss of heterozygosity at loci of candidate tumor suppressor genes in microdissected primary non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Detect. Prev. ( ), Hsueh, W.A., Law, R., The central role of fat and effect of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma on progression of insulin resistanceOn Ageing and Longevity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. (), Yen, C.J., Beamer, B.A., Negri, C., Silver, K., Brown, K.A., Yarnall, D.P., Burns, D.K., Roth, J., Shuldiner, A.R. Molecular scanning of the human peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR gamma) gene in diabetic Caucasians: identification of a Pro-Ala PPAR gamma missense mutation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. (), Zietz, B., Barth, N., Spiegel, D., Schmitz, G., Scholmerich, J., Schaffler, A. A Pro-Ala polymorphism in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR gamma) is associated with higher levels of total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol in male Caucasian type diabetes patients. Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes ().