Contents lists are available at the ScienceDirect Mechanisms of Ageing and Development journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mechagedev. 

Mechanisms of Ageing and Development journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mechagedev. 

A functional single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the promoter of ATM is associated with longevity. Tie Chen, Birong Dong, Zhenchan Lu, Baochun Tian, Jian Zhang, Jianlin Zhou, Hongmei Wu, Yanling Zhang, Jinhui Wu, Ping Lin, Jie Zhang, Hong Xu, Xianming Mo.

aLaboratory of Stem Cell Biology and Department of Geriatrics, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, West China Medical School, Sichuan University,

Chengdu 610041, China bLaboratory of Experimental Oncology, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, West China Medical School, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China cCollege of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan 410081, China  

Although the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene plays an important role in physiological processes such as sensing DNA damage and reducing oxidative stress while protecting telomere length; little information about ATM and longevity is available. Therefore we aim to examine the association between genetic variants in the promoter of ATM and longevity in Chinese Nonagenarians/Centenarians. Genotyping was performed in 789 long-lived individuals (LLIs) and 886 ethnically matched control subjects. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs189037 in the promoter region of the ATM gene was identified and a significant association between CT genotype and longevity was observed. Meanwhile, the SNP was able to affect expression of ATM mRNA by differentially binding to AP-2a. The CC genotype strongly bound to AP-2a, and the TT genotype showed less binding affinity to AP-2a. The AP-2a strongly repressed the reporter expression in the CC genotype and showed less repression of the TT genotype driving expression in vitro assay. Accordingly, TT genotype individuals had the highest ATM mRNA expression, CT genotype individuals had moderate ATM mRNA expression, and the CC genotype individuals had the lowest ATM mRNA.

Keywords: Long-lived individuals, Ataxia telangiectasia mutated, Single nucleotide polymorphism, AP-2a. 

2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved. 

In humans, patients with mutations in the ATM gene are featured with immunodeficiency, insulin resistance, growth retardation, pigmentary abnormalities, progressive cerebellar degeneration, and increased susceptibility to cancer (McKinnon, 2004). These observations suggest that ATM is critical to lifespan.

1. Introduction 

Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are now believed to be a major contributor to the pathogenesis of senescence through inducing DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) and telomere dysfunction (Herbig et al., 2006). Once DNA damage happens, the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene detects it; then ATM phosphorylates activates downstream kinases such as ChK1, ChK2 and P53 (Shiloh, 2003). As a result, cells undergo transient cell-cycle arrest, apoptosis or senescence. Meanwhile, in our body there exists an antioxidant system which can reduce ROS levels. The ATM gene plays an important role in keeping balance in redox state. Mice with the ATM gene knocked out have progressive bone marrow failure resulting from a defect in hematopoietic stem cells function due to elevated ROS (Ito et al., 2004). The ATM gene is widely expressed in many tissues such as brain, skin, and endothelial cells (McKinnon, 2004). In aged mice, ATM expression and function are dramatically decreased. 

Recent studies in twins have indicated that longevity is moderately heritable and genetic variants account for 25% (Puca et al., 2001). However, as of now, reports about polymorphisms of the ATM gene mainly focus on cancer; little information about the relationship between the variants of ATM promoter region and longevity is available. So we intend to determine whether the association between genetic variants in ATM promoter and longevity exists.

2. Materials and methods 

2.1. Subjects 

1761 blood samples were collected from 875 long-lived individuals (LLIs) and 886 unrelated subjects from July 2005 to December 2007. Informed consent was obtained from all participants (as well as their legal proxies), all of Han Chinese descent and from the same region. The breakdown of the participants is as follows: LLIs included 280 men and 595 women, from 90 to 108 years, mean age 94.6, SD ±3.40, withoutDilution of templates and the analysis of amplified products was performed by an image analyzer (ChemiDocTM XRS, BIO-RAD, USA). B-Actin was used as an internal control (Giacconi et al., 2004). To validate genetic variations, we randomly selected 41 DNA samples from 29 variant and 12 invariant subjects for sequencing. One single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, rs189037) in the third amplicon of the ATM promoter (Fig. 1C) was identified. The SNP contains CC, CT, and TT genotypes in the tested human individuals. 

2.6. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) Synthetic double-stranded and 50 biotin-labeled and unlabeled probes were obtained from Takara. In brief, purified human recombinant GST-AP-2a protein and labeled probes were incubated in a 30 ml binding reaction mixture for 30 min at 4°C. To prevent nonspecific binding, poly(dI-dC) and salmon sperm DNA were added to the mixture. Then, the samples were separated on a 6% polyacrylamide gel at 4°C for 90 min at 100 V in 0.5 M Tris-glycine buffer when the gels were pre-run for 50 min at 100 V. After electrophoresis, transfer was performed at 4°C and 250 mA for 90 min. The products were detected by Stabilized Streptavidin-Horseradish Peroxidase Conjugate (Roche). Unlabeled probes at a 100-fold molar excess were added to the reaction for competition.

Computational analysis showed that the third amplicon of ATM promoter region contains two Sac II restriction enzyme sites; one of them is in the SNP (C/T) only when the T > C institution at nucleotide 116 is present (Fig. 2). Therefore, we developed PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) to determine genotypes. Before genotyping was carried out, we examined the RFLP reliability, and both direct sequencing and Sac II restriction digestion detected 41 DNA samples. The concurrence rate of both methods was 100%, indicating that the PCR-RFLP method is reliable (data not shown).

(Supplement Tables 1 and 2), and a far higher frequency in LLIs was observed (Supplement Table 3). In addition, association analysis did not show any gender specificity (data not shown). The distribution of the observed genotypes in long-lived individuals and control subjects conformed to the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Genotyping was conducted by PCR-RFLP in 789 long-lived individuals and 886 control subjects. Comparison of genotypic frequencies revealed that there is a significant association between the genotypes and longevity (P = 0.01), but not alleles (Table 2). LLIs obviously showed a higher frequency of CT genotype than controls (53.0% versus 45.9%, P = 0.004). Furthermore, the percentage of CT heterozygote increases with age in both LLIs and controls.

3.3. AP-2a binds to the SNP site to repress ATM transcription To examine whether the SNP regulates the ATM mRNA expression in vivo, we measured the ATM mRNA levels in peripheral mononuclear cells from human individuals by RT-PCR (McKinnon, 2004). The results from 42 healthy old individuals showed that TT genotype has the highest level of ATM mRNA expression than the other two genotypes (Fig. 3A), although no significant differences were found between CC and CT genotypes (CC versus TT, P = 0.001; CT versus TT, P = 0.006; CC versus CT, P = 0.818), but an obvious tendency in the level of ATM expression from CC to TT genotypes was observed (Supplement Fig. 1). These results indicate that the SNP regulates the ATM mRNA expression in human cells in vivo.

To figure out the mechanism in which the SNP regulates the ATM mRNA expression, we analyzed the sequences around the SNP and found that the SNP forms an activator protein 2a (AP-2a) binding site. Then, we examined the binding ability of AP-2a on the sequences of the SNP by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). EMSA was carried out using purified human recombinant AP-2a protein and biotin-labeled probes with either DNA fragments of the C or T allele. AP-2a strongly bound to the oligonucleotide containing the C allele and weakly associated with the oligonucleotide probe with the T allele. Competition assays with unlabeled probe further confirmed a specific interaction between AP-2a and the C allele (Challenges and Insights. Nature Reviews Genetics, Giacconi, R., Cipriano, C., Albanese, F., Boccoli, G., Saba, V., Olivieri, F., Franceschi, C., Mocchegiani, E., The G/C polymorphism L-is useful to screen old subjects at risk for atherosclerosis or to reach successful aging. Experimental Gerontology, Herbig, U., Ferreira, M., Condel, L., Carey, D., Sedivy, J.M., Cellular senescence in aging primates. Science, Ito, K., Hirao, A., Arai, F., Matsuoka, S., Takubo, K., Hamaguchi, I., Nomiyama, K., Hosokawa, K., Sakurada, K., Nakagata, N., et al., Regulation of oxidative stress by ATM is required for self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells. Nature, Leask, A., Byrne, C., Fuchs, E., Transcription factor AP and its role in epidermal-specific gene expression. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Liu, W.G., Smith, D.I., Rechtzigel, K.J., Thibodeau, S.N., James, C.D. Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) used in the detection of germline and somatic mutations. Nucleic Acids Research , Lombard D.B., Chua K.F. Mostoslavsky R. Franco S. Gostissa M. Alt F.W DNA repair genome stability and aging. Cell , Minnon P.J. ATM and ataxia telangiectasia second in molecular medicine review series. EMBO Reports , Puca A.A. Daly M.J. Brewster S.J. Matise T.C. Barrett J. Shea-Drinkwater M. Kang S. Joyce E. Nicoli J. Benson E., et al., A genome-wide scan for linkage to human exceptional longevity identifies a locus on chromosome Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Shiloh, Y., ATM and related protein kinases: safeguarding genome integrity. Nature Reviews Cancer, Sun, T., Gao, Y., Tan, W., Ma, S., Shi, Y., Yao, J., Guo, Y., Yang, M., Zhang, X., Zhang, Q., et al., A six-nucleotide insertion-deletion polymorphism in the CASP promoter is associated with susceptibility to multiple cancers. Nature Genetics , Tyner S.D., Venkatachalam S., Choi J., Jones S., Ghebranious N., Igelmann H., Lu X.B. Soron G. Cooper B. Brayton C. et al., p mutant mice that display early aging-associated phenotypes. Nature , Wolford J.K., Blunt D., Ballecer C., Prochazka M., High-throughput SNP detection by using DNA pooling and denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC). Human Genetics , Christensen, K., Johnson T.E., Vaupel J.W. (2006). The quest for genetic determinants of human longevity: challenges and insights. Nature Reviews Genetics 7, 436.

Ito et al. reported that mice with ATM deficiency showed accelerated aging. However, a recent study done by Jaejoon Won et al. demonstrated that moderately reduced activity of the ATM gene could reverse senescence in BJ fibroblasts through inhibiting P53 signaling pathway. So the ATM gene has a double-edged role. Firstly, as a regulator of oxidative stress, it protects us from reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced DNA damage. The other role is being a sensor of DNA damage, triggering cellular senescence, apoptosis, or transient cell-cycle arrest. Based on the findings above, we suggest that neither low expression nor high expression of the ATM gene is good for lifespan. Therefore, moderate levels of ATM expression may be the best way to prolong lifespan. Inconsistent with this opinion, our results show that the CT genotype, which shows moderate levels of ATM expression, is overrepresented in the long-lived group and noticeably, individuals with CT heterozygote have the potency to live long (Supplement Tables 1 and 2).

In conclusion, lifespan is the outcome of complicated processes involved in many genes and non-genetic factors (Christensen et al., 2006). In our study, all participants are from the same region (countryside), they have similar lifestyles, and confusing factors (non-genetic factors) are almost not presented. Genes are predominant factors for longevity; therefore, our results are reliable, and other polymorphisms associated with longevity may exist.