Mechanisms of Aging and Development 126 (2005) 341-345 www.elsevier.com/locate/mechagedev Evidence for Inheritance of Exceptional Longevity

Gil Atzmon, Marielisa Rincon, Pegah Rabizadeh, Nir Barzilai

a Department of Medicine, Institute for Aging Research, Diabetes Research and Training Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA b Pediatric Endocrinology, Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY 10461, USA Available online 6 November 2004

Abstract
Subjects with exceptional longevity have a lower incidence and/or significant delay in the onset of age-related diseases. Their family members may inherit biological factors that modulate aging processes and disease susceptibility. In a case-control study, we aim to determine the phenotype and genotype of exceptional longevity in a genetically homogenous population (Ashkenazi Jews) and their offspring. An age-matched control group of Ashkenazi Jews was used as a control group. We demonstrated that exceptional longevity and healthy aging in humans is an inherited phenotype across three generations. Moreover, we demonstrated that subjects with exceptional longevity and their offspring have significantly larger high-density lipoprotein (HDL) levels and particle sizes and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) levels that reflect on their health and cognitive function performance. This phenotype has led us to study candidate genes involved in lipoprotein metabolism and to the implication of homozygosity for the 405 valine (V) allele of cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP). A markedly higher frequency of a functional CETP variant that led to increased particle sizes of HDL and LDL and thus better health performance is the first example of a phenotype and an associated genotype in humans with exceptional longevity. Hopefully, this line of research will lead us to establish which genotype is necessary (although not necessary sufficient) for prolonged disease-free aging.

Keywords: Lipoprotein particle size; High-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol; Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol; Longevity; Centenarians; Cardiovascular disease; Cognitive function; Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP); Genetics

Manipulations on lower organisms, though, provide strong support for the concept that genes can control lifespan and that cellular and metabolic pathways may mediate this phenotype (Barzilai and Shuldiner, 2001). A growing number of human longevity studies support the notion that families with exceptional longevity have a unique phenotype (Atzmon et al., 2004; Barzilai et al., 2003; Terry et al., 2003) and genotype (Barzilai et al., 2003; Geesaman et al., 2003; Perls and Terry, 2003a; Perls and Terry, 2003b). Since extreme longevity is a rare phenotype (1/10,000), efforts to collect and study such individuals are enormous. There are only a few major research groups that investigate this unique phenotype. Several approaches have been used to understand environmental and genetic variables involved in the phenotype of long-lived individuals. Selection of study populations has included isolated groups of centenarians (Lio et al., 2003), mixed population from the same area across the world (Blanche et al., 2001; Choi et al., 2003; Rosholm et al., 2002; Sikora, 2000).

Our approach was designed to overcome some of the problems in tackling the potential biological complexity of exceptional longevity. First, to avoid the task of population stratification, we gathered Ashkenazi Jews who were relatively healthy past the age of 95. This unique population originated in the Pale of Europe up to the 17th century, encountered a combination of plagues, wars, and anti-Semitic persecution, constricting the population size to an estimated few hundred thousands. This relatively small group then experienced rapid population growth, but ensuing generations stemmed from a relatively limited number of founders. The genetic makeup of Ashkenazi Jews is, therefore, comparatively homogenous, making it easier to identify important genetic differences, for example, the genes for ovarian cancer and breast cancer which were originally identified in studies done among Ashkenazi women (Lancaster et al., 1997).

Second, we argued that the phenotype that was helpful during the aging of our subjects might not be apparent at the end of their lives. Therefore, we recruited their offspring who may be enriched with longevity phenotype and genotype if it is indeed a marked one. Third, because the controls for centenarians died a few decades ago, we established an age-matched control group for their offspring. This group consists mainly of the spouses of the offspring or their neighbors who share much of their environment. Here, we will demonstrate the advantages of suchThere is a significant statistical association between genetic variation in CETP and exceptional longevity (Barzilai et al., 2003). Homozygosity for the 405V allele of CETP was significantly higher among centenarians and their offspring compared to an Ashkenazi control group (Fig. 3). Further investigation of subjects carrying the VV genotype showed lower serum CETP levels and larger lipoprotein particle sizes. Following reasonable statistical assumptions, we calculated that the attributable risk of having the VV genotype to reach exceptional old age is 18.1. We proposed a causal connection between individuals carrying the VV genotype and survival advantage, mediated by decreased levels of CETP that promote higher lipoprotein sizes and levels which we believe lead to exceptional longevity (Barzilai et al., 2003). This finding, along with the recent discovery that a common polymorphism of microsomal transfer protein (MTP), a protein involved in HDL levels and cognitive function, is associated with exceptional longevity (Geesaman et al., 2003), provides further evidence for a link between genetics and a protective lipoprotein phenotype.

Collecting this large number of centenarians has allowed us to relate a biological phenotype to a functional one. We hypothesized that high plasma HDL levels are protective on cognitive function among centenarians. We tested cognitive capability by minimental score test (MMSE) and indeed, the HDL plasma levels were highly positively correlated with the MMSE test score. Strict analysis of the MMSE distribution compared to HDL levels revealed that subjects with higher HDL plasma levels were significantly differentiated in MMSE score compared to subjects with low HDL levels, both in men and women (Atzmon et al., 2002). Statistical adjustment for gender, triglyceride levels, nutrients, BMI, LDL levels, albumin, and apolipoprotein (APO-A1) did not affect the association strength between HDL levels and cognitive function. Thus, HDL is a strong independent predictor of cognitive function in this population with very old brains (Atzmon et al., 2002).

The mechanisms of extending life or its components are still unknown. We believe that we have established some insight into the understanding of exceptional longevity and its complexity through the connection between favorable lipid profiles and being spared from age-related diseases. Because such a large percentage of centenarians and offspring have large lipoprotein particle size, we suggest that a favorable lipoprotein profile is necessary but may not be sufficient for exceptional longevity. Indeed, these subjects had to survive the childhood infection epidemic of the beginning of the last century; they avoided cancer and other age-related diseases. Interestingly, 15% of our population has or had a variety of tumors, and the distribution of tumors amongst those with and without CETP genotype is similar. However, we found that centenarians have the same cancer type distribution compared to a common population, but it occurs 20 years later and in mild condition. This data was not associated with any genotype or phenotype described earlier and further illustrates the complexity in elucidating factors involved in longevity. Nevertheless, association analysis of the CETP gene polymorphism demonstrating a causal connection to a favorable lipid profile leads us to conclude that CETP may be the first gene implicated in longevity. Hopefully, this line of research will lead us to establish which genotype is necessary or/and sufficient for lipoprotein metabolism and exceptional longevity (Barzilai et al., 2003).

Of special note is our approach for phenotype. We have realized that a phenotype that could have sustained our subjects throughout life may not be determined any longer because they are near the end of their life. At this age, phenotypic changes that are seen with longevity may be attenuated as in the examples of BMI and HDL levels. In addition, centenarians do not have the appropriate control group, consisting of subjects who died decades ago. Therefore, our study is unique in setting a control group of offspring of centenarians and their age-matched spouse or neighbors. We have shown that the offspring are healthier than the control, supporting the transfer of genetics from their prolong-lived parents. It is this group that allowed us to conclude that lipoprotein particle size is inherited and led us to focus on candidate genes.

In recent years, the strong component of inheritance of longevity among the oldest old became well-established. Increased odds ratios between 4- and 17-fold from appropriate control have been demonstrated amongst siblings and parents of subjects with exceptional longevity (Atzmon et al., 2004; Perls et al., 1998). However, approaches that led to implication of genetic/biological pathway for longevity have been discovered very recently (Barzilai et al., 2003; Geesaman et al., 2003). The two approaches have been a result of identifying a specific intermediate phenotype leading to a candidate gene approach; furthermore,