Contents lists are available at the ScienceDirect Mechanisms of Ageing and Development journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mechagedev. The beta2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) gene's Gln27Glu polymorphism, but not the Arg16Gly polymorphism, appears to be related to a wide range of phenotypes associated with aging. These include cancers at different sites, myocardial infarction (MI), intermittent claudication (IC), and overall/healthy longevity in the Framingham Heart Study Offspring cohort. The Gln27Gln genotype increases the risks of cancer, MI, and IC, while the Glu27 allele or, equivalently, the Gly16Glu27 haplotype tends to protect against these diseases. Genetic associations with longevity are of the opposite nature at young-old and oldest-old ages, highlighting the phenomenon of antagonistic pleiotropy. The mechanism of antagonistic pleiotropy is associated with an evolutionary-driven advantage of carriers of a derived Gln27 allele at younger ages and their survival disadvantage at older ages as a result of increased risks of cancer, MI, and IC. The ADRB2 gene can play an important systemic role in healthy aging in an evolutionary context that warrants exploration in other populations. 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

The ADRB2 gene is involved not only in vascular responses but also in pulmonary, endocrine, and central nervous systems functioning (Brodde, 2008a,b). Arg16Gly and Gln27Glu polymorphisms' roles in the pathophysiology of heart disease (Heckbert et al., 2003), hypertension (Puddu et al., 2007), obesity (Jalba et al., 2008), diabetes (Pinelli et al., 2006), asthma (Contopoulos-Ioannidis et al., 2005), Alzheimer's disease (Yu et al., 2008), COPD (Matheson et al., 2006), and cancer (Huang et al., 2001) have been studied in different populations.

Introduction: The etiology of complex phenotypes entails epistatic and gene-environment interactions, making relevant gene association studies a challenging task. Polymorphisms in the beta2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) gene have long attracted the attention of health researchers for their possible multiple physiological and health effects, particularly those involving vascular responses and airway function (Buscher et al., 1999; Contopoulos-Ioannidis et al., 2005; Hindorff et al., 2005; Snyder et al., 2005). ADRB2 is a member of the receptor family that mediates the physiological effects of the hormone epinephrine and the neurotransmitter norepinephrine. Adrenergic stimulation of the ADRB2 influences cardiovascular function by regulating vasomotor tone (Guimaraes and Moura, 2001). This function makes ADRB2 an important target in cardiovascular disease therapy. The two most common functional single nucleotide polymorphisms of the ADRB2 gene are rs1042713 (46GA) and rs1042714 (79CG), which result in changes of amino acids at codon 16, Arg to Gly, and at codon 27, Gln to Glu, respectively (George, 2008). Various studies have shown that the role of these polymorphisms is broad in nature because of their involvement not only in vascular responses but also in pulmonary, endocrine, and central nervous systems functioning.

The pleiotropy of the effects of these genetic variants makes them promising candidates for studies of genetic predisposition to healthy aging (Melzer et al., 2007), which is often defined as life with preserved health and physical, social and mental wellness, independence, and quality of life (Peel et al., 2004). Although a common goal is to determine genetic pathways that could directly modulate senescence (Johnson, 2005), a more realistic strategy is to understand mechanisms involved in the process of development of aging-associated disorders to improve the health of an increasing elderly population in contemporary societies (Hadley and Rossi, 2005; Melzer et al., 2007; Olshansky et al., 2007; Sierra et al., 2008). Currently, a large number of genetic studies focus on aging per se in model organisms and humans (Vijg and Suh, 2005). Likewise, a large body of studies focus on a single particular disease phenotype (e.g., Brodde, 2008b). Integration of these diverse initiatives in a systematic way could greatly advance studies of the genetics of healthy aging. The problem is that an integrative approach requires rich data on health and longevity, which are typicallyeffect is attributed to the Gln27 allele. The study categorized BMI using the U.S. federal guidelines, and diabetes was defined based on the WHO-1985 guidelines. The FHSO cohort included respondents aged 570 years residing in Framingham, MA, launched in 19711975, resulting in a total sample of N = 5124 subjects. The publicly released limited-access FHSO data available for this study have phenotypic information assessed at six FHSO examinations performed between 1971 and 1997. The study participants have been followed for the occurrence of certain aging-associated diseases, with emphasis on CVDs and cancer, and death through 2007. Our analyses show that the Gln27Glu polymorphism is more relevant to diseases than the Arg16Gly polymorphism. Therefore, we present the results for the Gln27Glu polymorphism and show potential mediating/modulating role of the Arg16Gly polymorphism by evaluating the effect of six common compound genotypes of these two polymorphisms.

CVDs and cancers were selected as the most common aging-associated diseases studied on their associations with common variants of the ADRB2 gene. An overall longevity phenotype was defined as reaching a certain old age at the end of the follow-up period or at date of death. For the purpose of the study, cut-offs between long and short life were left flexible ranging from the youngest possible age to the oldest possible age.

DNA was collected for living participants of the FHSO in the late 1980s and through 1990s. Genotyping of about 1900 offspring subjects was performed under the Cardio-Genomics program that focused on selected candidate genetic markers of cardiovascular development. Two common Arg16Gly and Gln27Glu polymorphisms of the ADRB2 gene were selected for this study because of their documented multiple physiological and health effects that warrant exploration of their relationship with aging-associated phenotypes.

The Glu27Glu homozygous genotype showed a highly significant protective role against cancer (all sites but skin) for men and women combined. The results were evaluated for survival patterns and relative risks focusing on the 4th, 5th, and 6th examinations. The protective effect holds for each sex, and similar relationships were observed for breast and prostate cancers as well as for the remaining cancer sites. The Glu27Glu homozygote is tightly linked to the Gly16Gly homozygote, and the Gly16Gly/Glu27Glu compound genotype resembles the effect of the Glu27Glu genotype. The effects of the Gln27Gln and Gln27Glu genotypes can theoretically be mediated or modulated by the Arg16Gly polymorphism. However, there is no evidence of a functional relationship between the Arg16Gly polymorphism and these aging-associated phenotypes.population. Fig. 4B shows that the Gln27Glu polymorphism affects the signaling properties of the β2-adrenergic receptor and that the Glu27 allele enhances receptor coupling to Gs protein, which activates adenylyl cyclase and leads to increased intracellular cAMP concentration (Green et al., 1994; Liggett, 2003). As a result, the Glu27 allele confers enhanced bronchodilator response to β2-adrenergic agonists (Israel et al., 2000) and reduced risk of asthma exacerbations (Wechsler et al., 2006). However, elevated cAMP concentration may also increase the activity of protein kinase A and downstream signaling pathways that promote cell growth and proliferation (Garcia-Sainz et al., 1997; Rangwala et al., 2000). This effect may contribute to increased risk of cancer at younger ages. At older ages, however, increased cAMP concentration may activate protein kinase A-dependent pathways that promote cell survival and resistance to stressors like oxidative damage (McCubrey et al., 2007; Salmeen et al., 2008). This effect may contribute to improved healthspan and lifespan at older ages.

Overall, our study provides evidence for a systemic role of the ADRB2 gene in healthy aging and longevity, and highlights the importance of considering both disease-specific and overall longevity phenotypes when investigating genetic factors that influence aging-related outcomes. Our findings suggest that the Gln27Glu polymorphism may be a promising target for interventions aimed at promoting healthy aging and extending lifespan. However, further studies are needed to confirm our results and elucidate the underlying mechanisms of its effects.The text contains several errors that need correction. Here is the processed text:

The young-old population (i.e., those who reached the age of 65 years, about 40% of the sample, at the end of follow-up in 2007) showed a pattern similar to that of the entire sample. This implies that evolutionary selection likely worked against the ancestral Glu27 allele and favored the derived Gln27 allele because mortality selection at young ages could not explain the observed proportions given the small death rates of adults (e.g., http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/deaths.htm) and infants (Singh and Yu, 1995) in contemporary U.S. The systemic role of the polymorphism is further augmented by the consistently unfavorable role of the derived Gln27 allele in the etiology of cancer, MI, and IC. The ancestral Glu27 allele seems to play a protective role for these phenotypes. The mode of inheritance for these alleles is different for cancer, MI, and IC. Specifically, Fig. 1AC shows the recessive effect of the Glu27 allele on cancer phenotype, whereas Fig. 1E and F show its dominant effect on MI and on the compound phenotype of MI and IC. Fig. 4B shows that frequencies of the Gln27 and Glu27 alleles are the same in the sample of individuals who died relatively early in life (LS < 72 years), whereas the Gln27 allele is significantly more frequent than the Glu27 allele in the LL group (who are predominantly survivors; LS > 72 years), resembling patterns in Fig. 1A. Furthermore, the frequency of the Gln27 allele in the sample of individuals who died later in life (Fig. 4D, LS < 83 years) becomes significantly larger than that of the Glu27 allele, whereas frequencies of these alleles become the same in the LL group (Fig. 4D, LS > 83 years). This implies that the frequency of the Gln27 allele increases in the group of deceased individuals and declines in the LL group, who are predominantly survivors (equivalently, the frequency of the Glu27 allele exhibits opposite behavior). This dynamic is explained by a survival disadvantage of carriers of the Gln27 allele attributable to increased risks of cancer, MI, and IC, as shown in Fig. 4C for the case of cancer (similar patterns hold when deaths among MI and IC patients are added). Note that because of the recessive effect of the Glu27 allele on cancer phenotype (Fig. 1A), this protective role is more pronounced for the Glu27Glu homozygote. 

The ADRB2 gene is implicated in several physiological systems such as immune, vascular, pulmonary, and nervous (Brodde, 2008a,b). Some studies suggest that a common ADRB2 signaling pathway (involving ADRB2-mediated catecholamine, e.g., epinephrine-induced activation of adenylate cyclase through the action of G proteins) interacts with multiple proteins from various cell molecular pathways (Benovic, 2002). This might provide a biological rationale for pleiotropic physiological effects of the ADRB2 gene (Brodde, 2008a; Leineweber et al., 2004). In vascular tissue, for instance, the ADBR2 receptor regulates vasodilation and in healthy myocardium it regulates chronotropic and inotropic responses to endogenous and exogenous adrenergic agents (Brodde and Michel, 1999). The Arg16Gly and Gln27Glu polymorphisms are both associated with vasodilator responsiveness (Brodde, 2008b) and thus can be connected with cardiovascular events. Prior studies, however, are not in agreement on which specific variants of these polymorphisms are associated with enhanced vasodilation (Brodde, 2008b). Our findings are in line with earlier epidemiologic studies that support the protective effect of the Glu27 allele on risks of MI, as documented both in longitudinal population-based studies (e.g., the Cardiovascular Health Study (Heckbert et al., 2003)) and in case-control studies (e.g., Sala et al., 2001). 

Thus, the derived Gln27 allele was selected during evolution because of its favorable role for certain (unknown) conditions beneficial for early life. However, this advantageous effect appears to be not relevant for the oldest-old ages, which follows from the change of the favorable role of the Gln27 allele to an unfavorable one (Fig. 3). This unfavorable role is the result of a survival disadvantage for carriers of the derived Gln27 allele and, respectively, a survival advantage for carriers of the ancestral Glu27 allele associated with late-life health conditions. Given unknown forces driving theAdverse environments, which are markedly different from modern conditions, especially in developed societies (Kuningas et al., 2008), can be responsible for entirely stochastic changes in allele frequencies due to evolutionary forces (e.g., genetic drift) (Zimmer, 2001). These arguments, along with others, suggest that even a truly positive effect may not necessarily be replicated in other populations due to the inherent complexity of the net of causation of aging-associated phenotypes, which is not a result of a global genetic program similar to, for instance, the program of development (Thomas and Clayton, 2004; Vijg and Suh, 2005). As a consequence, replication studies should be accompanied by strategies for revealing potential effect modulators. Our study provides arguments that the lack of replication can be evolutionarily driven. For instance, because evolution has worked differently in Whites, Blacks, and Asians, the frequency of the derived Gln27 allele appears to be markedly different in these ethnic groups, i.e., 0.54-0.65 in Whites, 0.73-0.80 in Blacks, and 0.80-0.90 in Asians (Brodde, 2008a). Therefore, an unfavorable role of this allele for late-life phenotypes (which implies the case of antagonistic pleiotropy) revealed in the FHSO sample of whites might not necessarily be replicated in a sample of Blacks or Asians because these late-life phenotypes may not have driven evolutionary selection of the Gln27 allele. Lack of replication, however, might reveal race-specific factors contributing to late-life phenotypes.

Our analyses and current knowledge about molecular-biological mechanisms of ADRB2 mediating health effects support a systemic role of the ADRB2 gene in healthy aging. We also show that the same allele of the Gln27Glu polymorphism of this gene could be detrimental early in life, but its role may change to a favorable one in late life, implying the phenomenon of antagonistic pleiotropy. These important findings warrant further exploration in other populations.

Longevity confirmed in German centenarians. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., Flegal, K.M., Graubard, B.I., Williamson, D.F., Gail, M.H., Excess deaths associated with underweight, overweight, and obesity. JAMA, Gail, M.H., Johnson, N.L., In: Proceedings of the American Statistical Association: Sesquicentennial Invited Papers Session. American Statistical Association, Alexandria, VA. George, C.H., Genetic polymorphisms in beta and beta adrenergic receptors: variations without a theme? Heart Rhythm, Govindaraju, D.R., Cupples, L.A., Kannel, W.B., ODonnell, C.J., Atwood, L.D., DAgostinr., R.B., Fox,C.S., Larson,M., Levy,D., Murabito,J., Vasan,R.S., Splansky,G.L., Wolf,P.A., Benjamin,E.J., Genetics of the Framingham Heart Study population. Adv. Genet., Guimaraes,S.,Moura,D., Vascular adrenergic receptors: an update.Pharmacol.Rev., Hadley,E.C.,Rossi,W.K., Exceptional survival in human populations: National Institute on Aging perspectives and programs. Mech. Ageing Dev., Heckbert,S.R., Hindorff,L.A., Edwards,K.L., Psaty,B.M., Lumley,T., Siscovick,D.S., Tang,Z.,
Durda,J.P., Kronmal,R.A.,
Tracy,R.P.,
Beta-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms and risk of incident cardiovascular events in the elderly. Circulation, Hindorff,L.A., Heckbert,S.R., Psaty,B.M., Lumley,T., Siscovick,D.S., Herrington,D.M., Edwards,K.L., Tracy,R.P.,
beta()-Adrenergic receptor polymorphisms and determinants of cardiovascular risk: the Cardiovascular Health Study. Am. J. Hypertens., Huang,X.E., Hamajima,N., Saito,T., Matsuo,K., Mizutani,M., Iwata,H., Iwase,T., Miura,S., Mizuno,T.,
Tokudome,S.,
Tajima,K.,
Possible association of beta- and beta-adrenergic receptor gene polymorphisms with susceptibility to breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res., Iaccarino,G., Ciccarelli,M., Sorriento,D., Galasso,G., Campanile,A., Santulli,G., Cipolletta,E.,
Cerullo,V.,
Cimini,V.,
Altobelli,G.G.,
Piscione,F.,
Priante,O.,
Pastore,L.,
Chiariello,M.,
Salvatore,F.,
Koch,W.JBao, X., Mills, P.J., Rana, B.K., Dimsdale, J.E., Schork, N.J., Smith, D.W., Rao, F., Milic, M., O'Connor, D.T., Ziegler, M.G. Interactive effects of common beta-adrenoceptor haplotypes and age on susceptibility to hypertension and receptor function. Hypertension.

Barrett, J.C., Fry, B., Maller, J., Daly, M.J. Haploview: analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics.

Barzilai, N., Atzmon, G., Schechter, C., Schaefer, E.J., Cupples, A.L., Lipton, R., Cheng, S., Shuldiner, A.R. Unique lipoprotein phenotype and genotype associated with exceptional longevity. JAMA.

Benovic, J.L. Novel beta-adrenergic receptor signaling pathways. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.

Bochdanovits, Z., Gosso, F.M., van den Berg, L., Rizzu, P., Polderman, T.J., Pardo, L.M., Houlihan, L.M., Luciano, M., Starr, J.M., Harris, S.E., Deary, I.J., de Geus E.J.C.N., Boomsma D.I., Heutink P., Posthuma D. A functional polymorphism under positive evolutionary selection in ADRB2 is associated with human intelligence with opposite effects in the young and the elderly. Behav. Genet.

Bracken A.P., Pasini D., Capra M., Prosperini E., Colli E.. Helin K. EZH2 is downstream of the B-E-F pathway essential for proliferation and amplified in cancer. EMBO J.

Brodde, O.E. a. Beta- and beta-adrenoceptor polymorphisms and cardiovascular diseases. Fundam. Clin. Pharmacol.

Brodde, O.E. b. Beta- and beta-adrenoceptor polymorphisms: functional importance, impact on cardiovascular diseases and drug responses. Pharmacol. Ther.

Brodde, O.E., Michel, M.C. Adrenergic and muscarinic receptors in the human heart. Pharmacol. Rev.

Buscher, R., Herrmann, V., Ring, K.M., Kailasam, M.T., O'Connor, D.T., Parmer, R.J., Insel, P.A. Variability in phenylephrine response and essential hypertension: a search for human alpha(2B)-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.

Christensen, K., Johnson, T.E., Vaupel, J.W. The quest for genetic determinants of human longevity: challenges and insights. Nat. Rev. Genet.

Contopoulos-Ioannidis D.G., Manoli E.N., Ioannidis J.P.A.. Meta-analysis of the association of beta-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms with asthma phenotypes. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol.

Cupples L.A., Arruda H.T., Benjamin E.J., D'Agostino Sr., R.B., Demissie S., D'Agostino Jr., R.B.. Dupuis J.. Falls K.M.. Fox C.S.. Gottlieb D.J.. Govindaraju D.R.. Guo C.Y.. Heard-Costa N.L.. Hwang S.J.. Kathiresan S.. Kiel D.P.. Laramie J.M.. Larson M.G.. Levy D.. Liu C.Y.. Lunetta K.L.. Mailman M.D.. Manning A.K.. Meigs J.B.. Murabito J.M.. Newton-Cheh C.. O'Connor G.T.. O'Donnell C.J.. Pandey M.. Seshadri S.. Vasan R.S.. Wang Z.Y.. Wilk J.B.. Wolf P.A.. Yang Q.. Atwood L.D. The Framingham Heart Study 100K SNP genome-wide association study resource: overview of phenotype working group reports. BMC Med. Genet.

Dawber T.R. The Framingham Study: The Epidemiology of Atherosclerotic Disease. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.

Flachsbart F., Caliebe A., Kleindorp R., Blanche H., voller-Eberstein H., Nikolaus S., Schreiber S., Nebel A. Association of FOXO3A variation with human longevity. Eur. J. Hum. Genet.

Pinelli M., Giacchetti M., Acquaviva F., Cocozza S., Donnarumma G., Lapice E., Riccardi G., Romano G., Vaccaro O., Monticelli A.