Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Mechanisms of Ageing and Development journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mechagedev

Mechanisms of Ageing and Development journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mechagedev

Functional EXO1 promoter variant is associated with prolonged life in centenarians

Almut Nebel a,1, Friederike Flachsbart a,1, Andreas Till a,1, Amke Caliebe b, Hele`ne Blanche c, Alexander Arlt d, Robert Hasler a, Gunnar Jacobs a, Rabea Kleindorp a, Andre Franke a, Binghui Shen e, Susanna Nikolaus f,g, Michael Krawczak b,g, Philip Rosenstiel a, Stefan Schreiber a,f,* 

a Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany 
b Institute of Medical Informatics and Statistics, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany 
c Fondation Jean Dausset-Centre dEtude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH), Paris, France 
d Molecular Gastroenterology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany 
e Department of Radiation Biology, City of Hope National Medical Center and Beckman Research Institute, Duarte CA 
f Department of General Internal Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany 
g Popgen Biobank, Christian-Albrechts-University,KielGermany 

ABSTRACT 

Human longevity is heritable with a genetic component of 25-32%. Variation in genes regulating the levels of somatic maintenance and DNA repair functions is thought to modulate the aging process and to contribute to survival at advanced age. We tested 92 non-synonymous SNPs in 49 DNA repair genes for a possible association with longevity in a sample of 395 German centenarians and 411 controls. The obtained association signal in exonuclease 1 (EXO1) was further investigated by fine mapping and mutation detection, leading to the identification of the functionally relevant SNP rs1776180. Our detailed analyses revealed that the C allele of this promoter SNP is significantly enriched in female centenarians. This finding replicated in 455 female French centenarians and 109 controls. The C allele leads to the loss of a binding site for the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor E47, resulting in higher EXO1 expression. Thus, we have detected a hitherto undescribed role for E47 as a negative regulator of EXO1 transcription and a genetic variant in the EXO1 promoter that counteracts the E47-mediated repression of the gene. Given the survival advantage that is associated with the C allele of rs1776180, EXO1 can be considered a candidate for a novel longevity-enabling gene.

Resolve DNA damage has evolved as highly conserved longevity assurance mechanisms (Hasty, 2005). Another line of evidence that links DNA repair with aging is that many of the human progeria disorders, such as Werner Syndrome, are caused by mutations in genes involved in DNA maintenance (reviewed by Hasty, 2005). Similarly, studies of mouse models show that genetic defects affecting genomic integrity underlie several of the accelerated aging phenotypes (Hasty, 2005; Lombard et al., 2005).

1. Introduction 

There is increasing evidence that somatic mutations progressively accumulate with age in various species, including humans (Hasty et al., 2003; Vijg, 2000). A wide range of exogenous agents (e.g. UV-radiation) and by-products of cellular metabolism (e.g. reactive oxygen species) are known to harm genetic material. In addition, mutations can arise from spontaneous replication errors (Hasty, 2005). Since DNA damage may result in dysregulated cellular processes, apoptosis, oncogenic transformation, genomic instability and senescence, maintenance systems are critical for both cellular and organismal homeostasis and survival (Lombard et al., 2005). Therefore, numerous pathways that either prevent or resolve DNA damage have evolved as highly conserved longevity assurance mechanisms (Hasty, 2005). These findings support the notion that variation in genes regulating the levels of somatic maintenance and DNA repair functions could also modulate the normal aging process and contribute to longevity (Kirkwood, 2005). 

In humans, it is conceivable that the more efficient these survival mechanisms are, the more likely an individual would be to attain old age in good physical and cognitive condition. This increase in life span would also lead to an increase in health span. In fact, it has been postulated that long-lived individuals, who are often characterized by a decelerated aging process and a delayed onset of age-related diseases (Hitt et al., 1999), are enrichednumber of errors and inconsistencies. Here is the processed text:

NCBI genome assembly build 36. The seven associated SNPs (markers indicated by an asterisk (*); plotted association results presented as a black circle (*)) were considered to be of potentially functional importance as they were located in the promoter, the 50-UTR or exons. The LD plot of the locus is based on the measure r2 and was generated with Haploview 3.32 using the genotypes of German control individuals. (C) Illustration of the EXO1 gene model highlighting the position of the seven potentially functional SNPs. EXO1 has several isoforms; here we refer to NM_130398 that contains 16 exons, 13 of which constitute the coding region (indicated by big boxes) whereas three exons (exon 1, exon 2 and alternative exon 2a) span the 50-UTR, and the last exon (nominal exon 15) contains coding sequence and the 30-UTR (small boxes). The seven SNPs analyzed in this study are located within functionally relevant regions: two SNPs in the 50-proximal promoter region (rs1776181A/G, rs1776180C/G), three SNPs in the 50-UTR (rs1776178A/G, rs1635517G/A, rs1776177C/T) and two non-synonymous SNPs in the coding region (rs735943A/G resulting in amino acid substitution H354R; rs4149965G/A resulting in V458M). ATG: start codon in nominal exon 3, TAA: stop codon in nominal exon 15. The position of the transcriptional start site as predicted by the Eponine prediction tool (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/analysis/eponine/) is indicated by an asterisk (*). Genotyping was performed using the SNPlexTM Genotyping System and TaqMan1 SNP Genotyping Assays (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, USA). Analyzed SNPs had a minor allele frequency of at least 1% and a minimal overall Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) in controls (P > 0.05). 

2.4. Statistical analysis
The genetic markers were subjected to allelic (CCA) and genotypic (CCG) case-control comparisons (χ2 test, P: P value obtained from an allele-based case-control comparison, using 1 degree of freedom (df); P: P value obtained from a genotype-based case-control CCG comparison, using a χ2 test with 2 df). Tagging SNPs of EXO1 and TCF3 were selected based on the HapMap genotypes of Utah residents with ancestry from northern and western Europe (CEU; http://www.hapmap.org/) and the pairwise tagging option implemented in the Haploview v3.32 program (Barrett et al., 2005; http://www.broad.mit.edu/mpg/haploview/) (minor allele frequency 0.03, pairwise r2 ≥ 0.8, P > 0.01; for tag SNPs, see Table S3). Haploview was also used for determining the LD measure r2 between SNPs in controls.

The seven EXO1 SNPs (Table 2) typed in the German sample and the functionally relevant SNP rs1776180 typed in the French set were analyzed by logistic regression using an additive model. 

2.6. Construction of plasmids
Plasmids for over-expression of human EXO1 protein in yeast cells were generated by inserting full-length EXO1 cDNA into expression vector pDB20 (Becker et al., 1991). Constructs for analysis of EXO1 50-UTR were designed by insertion of a 584 bp fragment of the 50-UTR region into vector pGL3control (Promega, Madison, WI). Constructs for analysis of EXO1 50-proximal promoter were designed by inserting 1199 bp of the EXO1 promoter region into vector pGL3Enhancer (Promega). Allele-specific constructs were established by site-directed mutagenesis using the QuickChange mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). The over-expression construct pMyc-E47-EYFP was kindly provided by Naihe Jing (Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Shanghai, China). For RNAi-mediated knock-down of E47/TCF3 expression, two independent target sequences directed against E47/TCF3 mRNA were inserted into vector pSUPER.Neo + GFP (OligoEngine, Seattle, WA).

2.8. Cell culture and transfection
Human embryonic kidney HEK293 (ACCregion containing all three SNPs upstream of the luciferase gene in the reporter gene construct. We generated four haplotypes based on the allele combinations of these three SNPs (AGC, GGA, AGT and GGT). We observed no significant difference in the reporter gene activity between any of the haplotypes (Fig. S2A).  To investigate whether the 50-UTR haplotypes may affect EXO1 expression levels, we quantified EXO1 mRNA expression in lymphoblastoid cell lines of homozygous carriers of each haplotype (Fig. S2B). We observed no significant difference in EXO1 mRNA expression levels between any of the haplotypes.  4. Discussion  In this study, we have investigated the association of cSNPs in DNA repair genes with human longevity and provide evidence for a functional role of two promoter SNPs (rs1776181 and rs1776180) located in the DNA repair gene EXO1. Our finding that the C allele of rs1776180 is associated with increased promoter activity and higher EXO1 mRNA expression levels provides a possible explanation for our observation that this allele is overrepresented among centenarians compared to younger controls. However, we found no evidence that any of the analyzed cSNPs affect the ability of EXO1 to repair UV-induced DNA damage or that any of the other analyzed SNPs in EXO1 or other DNA repair genes are significantly associated with human longevity.  The lack of association between cSNPs in most DNA repair genes and human longevity is consistent with previous studies (Mockett et al., 2010; Tanaka et al., 2003). Our study has focused on non-synonymous coding SNPs in DNA repair genes, whereas previous studies have investigated a broader range of genetic variants, including regulatory SNPs and copy number variations (CNVs). The latter studies have identified several genetic loci that are associated with human longevity, including the APOE gene (Nebel et al., 2011; Schachter et al., 1994), which we also confirmed in our study.  The functional relevance of the two promoter SNPs in EXO1 is supported by our observation that the C allele of rs1776180 is associated with increased promoter activity and higher EXO1 mRNA expression levels. This finding is consistent with a previous study reporting that the C allele of rs1776180 is associated with increased EXO1 mRNA expression levels in human lymphoblastoid cell lines (Yamamoto et al., 2009). However, the functional consequence of this increased expression on DNA repair capacity or other cellular functions remains to be investigated.Fragment in front of luciferase mRNA was used to create a heterologous reporter gene system. Using site-directed mutagenesis, we established constructs representing the common UTR haplotypes that show a frequency >1% in the German control individuals (i.e. AGC, GGC, AGT, GAC and GAT, see Table S4). Comparison of the five 50-UTR haplotypes by dual luciferase assay in HeLa cells did not reveal any differential reporter gene levels (Fig. S2), indicating that none of the analyzed 50-UTR haplotypes influences post-transcriptional processing or translation efficiency of EXO1. Fig. 3 shows that transcription factor E47 acts as a transcriptional repressor of EXO1. 

We observed a remarkable influence of the rs1776180 alleles on EXO1 promoter activity (Fig. 2A). Both haplotypes containing the C allele of rs1776180 showed a 69-fold higher activity than their G bearing counterpart (P < 0.01 for both comparisons). No significant difference in promoter activity was observed between the constructs carrying either allele of rs1776181. The C allele of rs1776180 is therefore most likely to enhance EXO1 promoter activity regardless of the rs1776181 allele. Interestingly, the C allele of rs1776180 was statistically significantly over-represented in centenarians (Table 2). 

The above-mentioned results prompted us to investigate promoter SNP-dependent EXO1 mRNA expression levels in human lymphoblastoid cell lines in relation to their rs1776180 genotype. No significant genotype-dependent EXO1 mRNA regulation was observed in cell lines originating from male individuals (P = 0.50; 17 CC vs. 15 GG genotypes; (cid:3)1.06-fold induction). In contrast, EXO1 transcript levels were significantly up-regulated (P = 0.03; 1.34-fold induction) in cell lines originating from females with the CC genotype (n = 10) when compared to women with the GG genotype (n = 23) and significantly up-regulated (P = 0.02; 1.45-fold induction) when compared to women with the genotype CG (n = 36; see real-time PCR data in Fig. 2B). These data support the notion of a female-specific functional effect, as already observed in the genetic analysis (Table 3). 

To shed more light on the functional mechanisms underlying the allele-dependent promoter activity of EXO1, we performed electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) with oligonucleotides representing the genomic region surrounding rs1776180 and a panel of nuclear extracts derived from different human cell lines. With all extracts tested, we detected a dramatic reduction in specific band shifts using the C allele of rs1776180 compared to the G allele (Fig. 3A, left panel). Specificity of protein binding was demonstrated by omitting nuclear extract in the binding reaction and by competition experiments (Fig. 3A, right panel). Using the JASPAR binding site prediction tool, we found that the region directly surrounding rs1776180 contains a potential binding site for the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) E-Box-binding transcription factor E47 that is depleted by presence of the C allele of rs1776180. To demonstrate direct binding of E47 to the promoter region surrounding rs1776180, DNA-binding complexes were analyzed for the presence of E47 protein by EMSA and subsequent immunoblotting (Shift-Western). As shown in Fig. 3B, E47 protein was detectable in two individual protein complexes that bound to the G allele of rs1776180 while no E47 was found binding to the C allele. E47, which is capable of forming homo- and heterodimers like other members of the E-Box protein subfamily, is encoded by the TCF3 gene (alias: E2A). 

For further analysis of functional crosstalk between E47 and EXO1 regulation, we used RNAi-mediated gene knock-down of E47 and transient over-expression of an E47-EYFP fusion protein. Knock-down of endogenous E47 in HeLa cells by RNAi (Fig. 3C) resulted in a statistically significant increase in EXO1 promoter transactivation using reporter constructs carrying the G allele of rs1776180 (Fig. 3D).Furthermore, overexpression of E47 fusion protein decreased luciferase activity, thus suggesting a role of E47 as a negative regulator of EXO1 promoter activity. Using the same experimental setting, a small but significant increase in luciferase activity was also detectable using constructs with the C allele of rs1776180 (not shown). This observation may suggest a minor contribution from other potential E47 binding sites in the proximal promoter region, which are not affected by any genetic variation influencing life expectancy. However, the absolute basal luciferase activity of the C allele constructs was up to 8-fold higher than those carrying the G allele (data not shown), which is consistent with our above-mentioned results (Fig. 2A). Since this novel regulatory mechanism is only relevant in tissues and cell types expressing both EXO1 and E47/TCF3, we analyzed the tissue distribution pattern of both genes. EXO1 is strongly expressed in thymus, spleen, and testis and showed weaker but yet detectable expression in the brain, liver, and ovary (Fig. 3E). E47/TCF3 mRNA displayed a remarkably similar expression pattern with strongest signals in spleen, thymus, liver, and testis and lower expression in the heart, brain, and ovary. Thus, concomitant expression of EXO1 and E47/TCF3 was most pronounced in lymphatic tissues and reproductive organs. EXO1 is a 5030 exonuclease that participates in post-replication DNA mismatch repair and other DNA metabolic pathways affecting genomic stability, including homologous recombination and DNA damage repair (Liberti and Rasmussen, 2004; Mimitou and Symington, 2008; Qiu et al., 1999). In addition, EXO1 has recently been shown to contribute to DNA damage-induced apoptosis (Bolderson et al., 2009; Klapacz et al., 2009). EXO1 physically interacts with the WRN protein that is encoded by the gene implicated in Werner Syndrome, one of the human progeria diseases (Sharma et al., 2003). WRN is crucial for the maintenance of overall genomic stability and, like EXO1, is also required for DNA repair and telomere metabolism (Lombard et al., 2005). The complexation of both proteins causes strong activation of EXO1 (Sharma et al., 2003). It has been suggested that WRN-induced stimulation of EXO1 activity may be important for the replication and stability of telomeres as well as the activation of DNA damage and signal checkpoint pathways in response to shortened telomeres (Sharma et al., 2003). An involvement of EXO1 in these pathways has been shown in both telomere-dysfunctional yeast and mouse models (Maringele and Lydall, 2002; Schaetzlein et al., 2007).

Taken together, our data indicate a major impact of variants of promoter SNP rs1776180 on EXO1 transcriptional regulation and suggest an important and hitherto undescribed role for E47 as a repressor of EXO1 expression. The functional results prompted us to focus on the genetic replication of the association between EXO1 and longevity on the promoter SNP rs1776180. Since the effect of this functionally relevant polymorphism was apparent only in German women (Table 3 and Fig. 2B), we considered females only for validation. We analyzed rs1776180 in a collection of 455 French female centenarians and 109 younger individuals whose age range was comparable to that of the German controls. In this French sample, the APOE-adjusted analysis confirmed the association signal (P = 0.044) (Table 4). The French allele and genotype APOE frequencies were similar to the original findings in the Germans, and an enrichment of the C allele in the centenarians compared to the controls was apparent in both populations. Therefore, the combined genetic and functional analyses point to a pivotal role of rs1776180 in the allele-specific regulation of EXO1, which in turn influences the ability to survive to exceptional old age.

An important role of EXO1 in controlling life expectancy has previously been reported in a murine model with a genetic ablation of the nuclease domain of the gene (Exo1(cid:3)/(cid:3)). The respective animals were viable, but their lifespan was significantly shortened (Schaetzlein et al., 2007; Wei et al., 2003). A first report of the Exo1(cid:3)/(cid:3) knockout mouse model on a mixed genetic background suggested that the beneficial influence of an increased Exo1 activity on lifespan could lie in mutation avoidance and, therefore, in the prevention of tumorigenesis (Flachsbart, F., Caliebe, A., Kleindorp, R., Blanche, H., Voller-Eberstein, H., Nikolaus, S., Schreiber, S., Nebel, A. Association of FOXO A variation with human longevity confirmed in German centenarians. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., Franceschi, C., Motta, L., Valensin, S., Rapisarda, R., Franzone, A., Berardelli, M., Motta, M., Monti, D., Bonafe, M., Ferrucci, L., Deiana, L., Pes, G.M., Carru, C., Desole, M.S., Barbi, C., Sartoni, G., Gemelli, C., Lescai, F., Olivieri, F., Marchegiani, F., Cardelli, M., Cavallone, L., Gueresi, P., Cossarizza, A., Troiano,L., Pini,G., Sansoni,P., Passeri,G., Lisa,R., Spazzafumo,L., Amadio,L.,
Giunta,S.,
Stecconi,R.,
Morresi,R.,
Viticchi,C.,
Mattace,R.,
De Benedictis,G.,
Baggio,G. Do men and women follow different trajectories to reach extreme longevity? Italian Multicenter Study on Centenarians (IMUSCE). Aging (Milano), Franke,A.,
Wollstein,A.,
Teuber,M.,
Wittig,M.,
Lu,T.,
Hoffmann,K.,
Nurnberg,P.,
Krawczak,M.,
Schreiber,S.,
Hampe,J. GENOMIZER: an integrated analysis system for genome-wide association data. Hum. Mutat.,
Frasca,D.,
Nguyen,D.,
Riley,R.L.,
Blomberg,B.B. Decreased E and/or E transcription factor activity in the bone marrow as well as in the spleen of aged mice. J. Immunol.,
Frasca,D.,
Vandeut,E.,
Riley,R.L.,
Blomberg,B.B. Reduced class switch in aged mice correlates with decreased E and activation-induced cytidine deaminase. J. Immunol.,
Hampe,J.,
Franke,A.,
Rosenstiel,P.,
Till,A.,
Teuber,M.,
Huse,K.,
Albrecht,M.,
Mayr,G.,
De La Vega,F.M.,
Briggs,J.,
Gunther,S.,
Prescott,N.J.,
Onnie,C.M.,
Hasler,R.,
Sipos,B.,
Folsch,U.R.,
Lengauer,T.,
Platzer,M.,
Mathew,C.G.,
Krawczak,M.,
Schreiber,S. A genome-wide association scan of nonsynonymous SNPs identifies a susceptibility variant for Crohn disease in ATG16L1. Nat. Genet., Hasty,P., Campisi,J., Hoeijmakers,J., van Steeg,H., Vijg,J., Aging and genome maintenance: lessons from the mouse? Science,
Hasty,P. The impact of DNA damage, genetic mutation, and cellular responses on cancer prevention, longevity, and aging: observations in humans and mice. Mech. Ageing Dev., Hitt,R., Young-Xu,Y., Silver,M., Perls,T. Centenarians: the older you get, the healthier you have been. Lancet,
Hjelmborg,J.V.B., Iachine,I., Skytthe,A., Vaupel,J.W., Mue,M., Koskenvuo,M., Kaprio,J., Pedersen,N.L., Christensen,K. Genetic influence on human lifespan and longevity. Hum. Genet., Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2009.08.004. References. 

Our study demonstrates a female-specific association of an EXO1 promoter SNP with longevity. Such sex-specificity is not surprising since gender is a major determinant of longevity, favoring women. It also accounts for important differences in the frequency of various age-related diseases. There is a distinct prevalence of women among long-lived individuals, reaching up to 85% in some populations of centenarians and super-centenarians (Perls and Terry, 2003). It has been suggested that the mortality rates in men and women follow different trajectories during aging and that a complex interaction of environmental and genetic factors is likely to affect the gender-specific probability of reaching old age (Candore et al., 2006; Franceschi et al., 2000).

Our results highlight the general importance of centenarians for genetic longevity research (Tan et al., 2008). Since the genetic contribution to life expectancy is strongest at very advanced ages (Hjelmborg et al., 2006), centenarians may be particularly enriched for beneficial variantsGenetics of exceptional human longevity. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc., Perls, T., Terry, D. Understanding the determinants of exceptional longevity. Ann. Intern. Med., Qiu, J., Qian, Y., Chen, V., Guan, M.X., Shen, B. Human exonuclease functionally complements its yeast homologues in DNA recombination, RNA primer removal, and mutation avoidance. J. Biol. Chem., R Development Core Team. A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria ISBN: - - - , URL: http://www.R-project.org. Rosenstiel, P., Fantini, M., Brautigam, K., Kuhbacher, T., Waetzig, G.H., Seegert, D., Schreiber, S. TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma regulate the expression of the W., Wang, H., Xue, L., Zhang, Z., Tong, T. 2004. Regulation of cellular senescence and p16(INK4a) expression by Id1 and E47 proteins in human diploid fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 279:31524-31532. Fantini M., Brautigam K., Kuhbacher T., Waetzig G.H., Seegert D., Schreiber S. 2003 TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma regulate the expression of the