Mechanisms of Aging and Development 126 (2005) 1178-1184 www.elsevier.com/locate/mechagedev - An affect-associated gene to human prevalence of the long-allele genotype of the serotonin transporter-linked gene in Japanese centenarians, a,* b b b Yasuyuki Gondo, Nobuyoshi Hirose, Yasumichi Arai, Ken Yamamura, b b b Ken-ichirou Shimizu, Michiyo Takayama, Yoshinori Ebihara, b a a c Susumu Nakazawa, Hiroki Inagaki, Yukie Masui, Koji Kitagawa a Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, 35-2 Sakae-cho, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-0015, Japan b Department of Geriatric Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan c Gumma Paz College, Gumma, Japan - Abstract: Negative affect such as depression and anxiety has been reported to be associated with morbidity and mortality, and polymorphisms of the serotonin transporter (5HTT) gene may be associated with such affect disorders. Hypothesizing that 5HTT gene polymorphisms could influence human longevity via negative affect; we compared the polymorphic variation of the 5HTT gene between 265 Japanese centenarians and control subjects. In addition, we evaluated the relationships between the 5HTT genotype and the physical, cognitive, and biological status of centenarians, as indicated by the Barthel Index, the Mini-Mental State Examination, and serum albumin concentration respectively. The frequency of the l/l genotype and the l allele was significantly greater in centenarians than in younger control subjects, particularly women. A significant effect of the 5HTT genotype on serum albumin concentration was observed in both sexes. Although there was sex optionality, the l allele may carry a longevity advantage possibly through behavioral mechanisms. # 2005 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved. - Keywords: Serotonin transporter gene-linked polymorphism region; Longevity; Centenarians; Gender difference; Serum albumin - 1. Introduction: Between gene polymorphisms and human emotion, affect, or behavior have been reported (Lesch et al., 1996). We describe here an investigation of the contribution of the affect-related serotonin transporter (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5HTT) gene-linked polymorphism region (5HTT-LPR) to longevity in a cohort taken from the Japanese population. Recent progress in genome studies has indicated that gene polymorphisms contribute to human longevity. These polymorphisms are thought to influence longevity through several potential mechanisms including the immune system (Takata et al., 1987; Bonafe et al., 2001) and the metabolic system (Schachter et al., 1994; Geesaman et al., 2003). Although psychobehavioral systems are also important factors in longevity, little is known about them, and little interest has been paid to polymorphisms of candidate genes that might influence human behavior. Recently, relationships The adverse impact of negative affect on health has been reported in many papers (Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2002). Major depression or depressed mood has been associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction (Pratt et al., 1996), decreased physical function (Rantanen et al., 2000), and higher cancer risk (Penninx et al., 1998), as well as mortality (Herrmann et al., 1998). Anxiety has been linked to heart disease, including myocardial infarction (Eaker et al., 1992; Kawachi et al., 1994). - 0047-6374/$ see front matter # 2005 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.mad.2005.06.006 Even though the findings regarding the effect of 5HTT gene polymorphism on negative emotion or health in Japanese subjects are equivocal, they do suggest that it would be valuable to explore the influences of 5HTT on human health and mortality. We hypothesized that 5HTT gene polymorphism influences human longevity via a negative impact on the affective state as a result of stressful life experiences. The frequency of the l/l genotype and l allele would therefore be higher among long-lived individuals than in the younger population. We also hypothesized that if a particular gene polymorphism has a positive impact on longevity, the functional status, such as basic activities of daily living (ADL), or cognitive function among people who possess this genotype would be better maintained, even in the final stages of their life. In the study presented here, we compared the distribution of 5HTT polymorphisms in a large number of Japanese centfinding was the association between the l allele and lower serum albumin concentration (p = 0.008). This effect was observed in women (p = 0.004) but not in men. 

In terms of the younger control group, the frequency of the l/l genotype was low among Japanese individuals, making accurate estimation of genotype distribution difficult. Therefore, results were combined with previous studies of Japanese populations to obtain a more accurate estimate. 

Overall, significant differences in the frequency of the l allele were observed between centenarians and younger controls, with a higher frequency in centenarians. However, this effect was only observed in women. 

In analyzing the effects of 5HTT genotype on physical, cognitive, and biological status in centenarians, no significant effects were observed for Barthel Index or MMSE. However, an association was found between the l allele and lower serum albumin concentration, particularly in women.Effect of genotype was observed for serum albumin concentration (F = 4.2, p < 0.05). Further, multiple comparisons indicated that serum albumin concentrations were higher in association with the l/l genotype than with the s/s genotype (p < 0.01). Neither a significant gender main effect nor a gender-genotype interaction was observed. We also conducted the same analysis on serum albumin concentration for our younger control subjects. The distribution of genotype and allele frequency for 5HTT in centenarians and control subjects is presented in Table 3. The genotype distributions matched expectations for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in younger control subjects. The l/l genotype was uncommon in both centenarians (8.3%) and control subjects (3.9%). The distribution of genotypes between centenarians and young control was compared, and a statistically significant difference was observed (l/l versus l/s and s/s, x2 = 7.8, p < 0.01). When an analysis was performed according to gender, a significant distribution difference was observed.

Mean and (S.D.) of NEO-FFI, Barthel Index, Mini-Mental State Examination, and serum albumin concentration by 5HTT genotypes in centenarians.

| | Men | Women | Statistics |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| NEO-FFI dimensions | | | |
| Neuroticism | 21.5 (6.4) | 15.9 (8.8) | n.s.. |
| Extraversion | 23.0 (5.7) | 26.7 (6.2) | n.s.. |
| Openness | 25.0 (4.2) | 22.2 (6.1) | n.s.. |
| Agreeableness | 30.0 (0.0) | 31.5 (6.4) | n.s.. |
| Conscientiousness | 35.5 (3.5) | 32.3 (9.2) | n.s.. |
| Barthel Index | 73.3 (46.2) | 73.3 (32.7) | Sex p < 0.01 |
| MMSE | 20.3 (5.5) | 16.3 (8.7) | Sex p < 0.05 |
| Albumin (g/dl) | 4.1 (0.2) | 3.7 (0.4) | Genotype p < 0.05 |

However, no significant effect of 5HTT genotype was observed in younger control subjects.

It was suggested that this gender difference could be explained by the biological and lifestyle differences between men and women. Several studies have suggested the existence of gender-genotype interactions in the effects of the serotonergic system. Whole blood serotonin level is higher in men (Weiss et al., 2005). The rate of serotonin synthesis in the central spinal fluid is lower in women than in men (Nishizawa et al., 1997), and it has been reported that the effect of the 5HTT genotype on serotonin turnover differs between the genders (Williams et al., 2003). The effect of treatment with a serotonin reuptake inhibitor on emotional disorders is greater in women throughout the life cycle (Yonkers, 2003). A higher frequency of suicide attempts was reported only in women with the s/s genotype (Baca-Garcia et al., 2002). The higher ratio of the l/l genotype in women theoretically results in increased sensitivity of their serotonergic system.

Discussion

The influence of 5HTT polymorphism on longevity in the Japanese population was investigated. We hypothesized that 5HTT polymorphism could mediate the human affective state, which influences health and longevity. First, we found a significant difference in genotype distribution and allele frequency for 5HTT polymorphism between centenarians and younger control subjects, particularly women. Second, we found a statistically significant but weak association between the 5HTT genotype and serum albumin concentration, which is a biological marker of health status among centenarians.

There is much psychological stress in human life. Centenarians living in Tokyo have experienced catastrophic life events including a catastrophic earthquake, two world wars, and personal life events such as bereavement resulting from the deaths of spouses and children. The negative impact of these life events on the affective state is thought to be greater in individuals with the s allele (Caspi et al., 2003; Grabe et al., 2004). We found that the distribution of both the l/l genotype and the l allele, which is a protective factor against stressful experiences, was higher in centenarians than in young control subjects. Even though we could not examine theProxy, rather than from the centenarians themselves. Thus, it is unlikely that the anxiety level of the centenarians influenced the decision to participate. We also compared the NEO-FFI score between those mail-survey participants (n = 209) who did not agree to be visited by our research members and those who did; no significant difference between the two groups was observed for any of the personality dimensions. Thus, we believe that the gene-related anxiety level did not influence participation in the study. On the other hand, though the ADL level of all participants in our study was deteriorated, Barthel Index score in visit survey participants (mean = 44.1, S.D. = 34.8) was significantly higher (p < 0.01) than in mail-survey participants (mean = 34.4, S.D. = 32.7). This implies that healthier centenarians were likely to participate in our study. To avoid sampling bias, a non-invasive sampling method (e.g., postal buccal washes) will be needed in future studies. However, concerning exploring the long-lived and healthy aging gene polymorphisms, the purpose of our study, observed results here could be situated as finding a clue of contribution of affect-associated gene to longevity.

Acknowledgments
We greatly appreciate the time and assistance provided by the centenarians and their family members. We could not have carried out this study without their kind cooperation. This study was partly supported by a grant from the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare for the Scientific Research Project on Longevity, a grant for studying the sociomedical background of centenarians (Principal Investigator, Nobuyoshi Hirose), a grant from the Japanese Ministry of Education, Science and Culture (No. 15730346, Yasuyuki Gondo), and aid for research from the Keio Health Consulting Center.

In terms of sampling bias, we also have to mention the young control data. Because of the low frequency of l/l genotype, and not population-based standardized value, we used pooled values as control. This method has the advantage of stabilizing the scattered genotype distribution among small sample studies. However, we could not avoid publication bias, that not all conducted data were published and difficult to control the participants' background. A standardized distribution of 5HTT polymorphism in various age groups with a representative sample must be compared to conform and replicate this finding.

Reference
Arinami, T., Ohtsuki, T., Yamakawa Kobayashi, K., Amemiya, H., Fujiwara, H., Kawata, K., Ishiguro, H., Hamaguchi, H., A synergistic effect of serotonin transporter gene polymorphism and smoking in association with CHD. Thromb. Haemost., Baca-Garcia, E., Vaquero, C., Diaz Sastre, C., Saiz Ruiz, J., Fernandez Piqueras, J., de Leon, J., A gender-specific association between the serotonin transporter gene and suicide attempts. Neuropsychopharmacology , Bennett, A.J., Lesch, K.P., Heils, A., Long, J.C., Lorenz, J.G., Shoaf, S.E., Champoux, M., Suomi, S.J., Linnoila, M.V., Higley, J.D., Early experience and serotonin transporter gene variation interact to influence primate CNS function. Mol. Psychiatry , Bonafe, M., Olivieri, F., Cavallone, L., Giovagnetti, S., Mayegiani F., Cardelli M., Pieri C., Marra M. Antonicelli R. Lisa R. Rizzo M.R. Paolisso G. Monti D. Franceschi C., A gender-dependent genetic predisposition to produce high levels of IL- is detrimental to longevity. Eur. J. Immunol. , Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T.E., Taylor, A., Craig, I.W., Harrington, H., M lay, J., Mill, J., Martin, J., Braithwaite, A., Poulton, R., Influence of life stress on depression: moderation by a polymorphism in the -HTT gene. Science , Collin, C., Wade, D.T., Davies, S., Horne V., The Barthel ADL Index: a reliability study. Int. Disabil. Stud. , Costa P, McCrae R., The NEO Personality Inventory manual. Psychological Assessment Resources Odessa. Eaker, E.D., Pinsky, J., Castelli, W.P., Myocardial infarction and coronary death among women: psychosocial predictors from a -year follow-up of women in the Framingham Study. Am. J. Epidemiol. , Folstein, M.F., Folstein, S.EHamaguchi, Arinami, T., Association between serotonin transporter polymorphism and smoking among Japanese males. Cancer Biomarkers Prev., Jerram, L., Coleman, G., The big five personality traits and health problems and health behavior in old age. Br. J. Psychol., Katsuragi, S., Kunugi, H., Sano, A., Tsutsumi, T., Isogawa, K., Nanko, Akiyoshi, J., Association between serotonin transporter polymorphism and anxiety-related traits. Biol. Psychiatry, Kawachi, I., Sparrow, D., Vokonas, P.S., Weiss, S.T., Symptoms of anxiety and risk of coronary heart disease: The Normative Aging Study. Circulation, Kiecolt-Glaser, J.K., Muire, L., Robles, T.F., Glaser, R., Morbidity and mortality: new perspectives from psychoneuroimmunology. Annu. Rev. Psychol., Kumakiri, C., Kodama, K., Shimizu, E., Yamanouchi, N., Okada, S., Okamoto, H., Sato, T., Shirasawa, H., Study of the association between the serotonin transporter gene regulatory region and personality traits in a Japanese population. Neurosci. Lett., Kunugi, H., Hattori, M., Kato, T., Tatsumi, M., Sakai, T., Sasaki, T., Nanko, S., Serotonin transporter gene polymorphisms: differences and possible association with bipolar affective disorder. Psychiatry Res.,
Kunugi, H., Ueki, A., Otsuka M., Isse K.. Hirasawa H.. Kato N.. Kobayashi S.. Nanko S.. Alzheimer's disease and polymorphism of the serotonin transporter gene: no evidence for association. Am. J. Med. Genet., Lesch, K.P., Bengel, D., Heils, A., Sabol, S.Z., Greenberg, B.D., Petri, Benjamin, J., Muller, C.R., Hamer, D.H., Murphy, D.L., Association of anxiety-related traits with a polymorphism in the serotonin transporter gene regulatory region. Science, Lio, D., Scola, L., Crivello, A., Bonafe, M., Franceschi, C., Olivieri, Colonna Romano G., Candore G., Caruso C.. Allele frequencies of +T->A single nucleotide polymorphism at the first intron of the interferon-gamma gene in a group of Italian centenarians. Exp. Gerontol.,
Lio, D., Scola, L., Crivello, A., Colonna Romano G., Candore G.. Cavallone L.. Franceschi C.. Caruso C... Association between IL-1beta promoter polymorphism and longevity. Genes Immun.,
Masui Y., Gondo Y., Inagaki H.. Kitagawa K.. Hirose N.. Arai Takayama M.. Ebihara Y.. Yamamura K.. Nakazawa S.. Shimizu Konishi K.. Kanno Y.. Fujimori J... The influence of personality traits on longevity and centenarians' ADL. In: The Gerontological Society of America's 56th Annual Scientific Meeting pp.,
Munafo M.R.. Clark T.G.. Moore L.R.. Payne E.. Walton R.. Flint J... Genetic polymorphisms and personality in healthy adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Mol. Psychiatry,
Murakami F.. Shimomura T.. Kotani K.. Ikawa S.. Nanba E... Adachi K... Anxiety traits associated with a polymorphism in the serotonin transporter gene regulatory region in the Japanese. J. Hum. Genet.,
Nakamura T.. Muramatsu T.. Ono Y.. Matsushita S.. Higuchi S.. Mizushima H.. Yoshimura K.. Kanba S.. Asai M... Serotonin transporter gene regulatory region polymorphism and anxiety-related traits in the Japanese. Am. J. Med. Genet.,
Nishizawa S., Benkelfat C., Young S.N., Leyton M., Mzengeza S., de Montigny C., Blier P., Diksic M... Differences between males and females in rates of serotonin synthesis in the human brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
Penninx B.W., Guralnik J.M., Pahor M., Ferrucci L., Cerhan J.R., Wallace R.B., Havlik R.J.... Chronically depressed mood and cancer risk in older persons. J. Natl. Cancer Inst.,
Pratt L.A., Ford D.E., Crum R.M., Armenian H.K., Gallo J.JAkiyoshi, J., "Association" between serotonin transporter gene polymorphism and anxiety-related traits. Biol. Psychiatry, Society of Americas' Annual Scientific Meeting, pp. Munafo, M.R., Clark, T.G., Moore, L.R., Payne, E., Walton, R., Flint, J., "Genetic polymorphisms and personality in healthy adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis." Mol. Psychiatry, Murakami, F., Shimomura, T., Kotani, K., Ikawa, S., Nanba, E., Adachi, K., "Anxiety traits associated with a polymorphism in the serotonin transporter gene regulatory region in the Japanese." J. Hum. Genet., Nakamura, T., Muramatsu, T., Ono, Y., Matsushita, S., Higuchi, S., Mizushima, H., Yoshimura, K., Kanba, S., Asai, M., "Serotonin transporter gene regulatory region polymorphism and anxiety-related traits in the Japanese." Am. J. Med. Genet., Nishizawa, S., Benkelfat, C., Young, S.N., Leyton, M., Mzengeza, S., de Montigny, C., Blier, P., Diksic, M., "Differences between males and females in rates of serotonin synthesis in the human brain." Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA , Penninx, B.W., Guralnik, J.M., Pahor, M., Ferrucci, L., Cerhan, J.R., Wallace, R.B., Havlik, R.J., "Chronically depressed mood and cancer risk in older persons." J. Natl. Cancer Inst. , Pratt, L.A., Ford, D.E., Crum R.M., Armenian H.K .,"Gallo JJ", Eaton, W.W., "Depression, psychotropic medication, and risk of myocardial infarction: Prospective data from the Baltimore ECA follow-up." Circulation , Rantanen, T., Penninx, B.W., Masaki, K., Lintunen, T., Foley, D., Guralnik, J.M., "Depressed mood and body mass index as predictors of muscle strength decline in old men." J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. , Rockett, I.R., Smith, G.S., "Homicide, suicide, motor vehicle crash, and fall mortality: United States experience in comparative perspective." Am. J. Public Health , Schachter, F., Faure Delanef, L., Guenot, F., Rouger, H., Froguel, P., Lesueur Ginot, L., Cohen, D., "Genetic associations with human longevity at the APOE and ACE loci." Nat. Genet. , K.A., 2003. "Special issues related to the treatment of depression in women." J. Clin. Psychiatry 64 (Suppl. 18), 813.