www.elsevier.com/locate/neuaging - VEGF Gene Variability in the Italian Population: Lessons Learned
Del Bo, Serena Ghezzi, Marina Scarlato, Diego Albani, Daniela Galimberti, Ugo Lucca, Mauro Tettamanti, Elio Scarpini, Gianluigi Forloni, Nereo Bresolin, Giacomo Pietro Comi

Dino Ferrari Centre, Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Milan, IRCCS Foundation Ospedale Maggiore Mangiagalli and Regina Elena, Padiglione Ponti, Via F. Sforza 35, 20122 Milano, Italy
Department of Neuroscience, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milan, Italy

Abstract:
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene polymorphisms have been associated with an increased risk of developing a wide variety of disorders from diabetes to neurodegenerative diseases. This suggests functions for VEGF not confined to its originally described vascular effects. Based on the protective roles of VEGF undisclosed in pathological conditions, we evaluated whether VEGF variability might also be a determinant for longevity. We analyzed four polymorphisms (2578C/A, 1190G/A, 1154G/A and 634G/C) within the VEGF gene promoter region in 490 unrelated healthy Italian subjects. Significant changes of allele frequencies were observed between young/elderly and long-lived subjects suggesting that VEGF gene variability can be inserted among the genetic factors influencing lifespan.

Keywords: Aging; Vascular endothelial growth factor; Genetic risk factor; Longevity

Introduction:
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an important angiogenesis cytokine that undergoes transcriptional and post-transcriptional induction by hypoxia. It has been implicated in several pathological conditions, from tumour proliferation to inflammatory and ischemic processes (Carmeliet, 2003; Ferrara et al., 2003). VEGF has been originally identified on the basis of its vascular effects, but recently has been recognized as an important signaling molecule in the nervous system, as well as in neurodegenerative disorders and in peripheral neuropathies (Rosenstein and Krum, 2004; Storkebaum and Carmeliet, 2004). An age-dependent decline in VEGF expression has been reported in different tissues; however, the molecular alterations responsible for this reduction have not been elucidated. Longevity represents a very complex phenomenon due to the interaction among genetic, environmental and lifestyle factors. Identification of genetic and non-genetic factors involved in aging has progressed extensively in recent years because of increased interest in defining the determinants of human life expectancy. It has been suggested that genes and biochemical factors likely to be implicated in aging-related disorders may have an important role also in human longevity. Among genetic markers, several variants in pro- or anti-inflammatory cytokines and in vascular factors have been shown to affect successful aging.

Materials and methods:
A total of 490 unrelated Italian individuals (40.2% males) born and resident in Northern Italy, ranging from 25 to 99 years of age, were enrolled for this study. We screened for four well-known polymorphisms localized in the promoter and 5'UTR region of VEGF gene. To carry out a comparative analysis of the genotypes, the whole cohort was divided into three age groups: (i) 166 young subjects (ranging from 25 to 65 years of age; mean standard deviation (S.D.) = 47.4 ± 11.2 years; 45.5% males); (ii) 158 elderly subjects (ranging from 66 to 84 years of age, mean S.D. = 75.7 ± 5.7 years; MMSE: available only in 35 subjects aged more than 80 years: 25.6 ± 1.8 points; 50.4% males); (iii) 166 long-lived subjects (ranging from 85 to 99 years of age; mean S.D. = 90.1 ± 3.3 years; MMSE: available only in six subjects aged more than 80 years: 28 ± 1.2 points; 48.8% males).

Results:
We analyzed the genotype and allele frequency distributions of the four polymorphisms in the three age groups. Significant changes of allele, genotype (2578/AA versus 2578/CC: OR=2.08, p=0.007; 1190/AA versus 1190/GG: OR=2.01, p=0.011) and haplotype (AAGG: 10.4% versus 14.9%, p=0group. *p and **p values were calculated using 2 or Fisher's exact tests with two degrees of freedom (for all genotypes) or with one degree of freedom (for allele comparisons). (n = 86) and subjects with 26 points (n = 80). We observed no significant difference between the two groups when genotype analysis was performed for all four polymorphisms (Supplementary data); in fact, 2578AA and 1190AA genotypes show a not significant increase in MMSE 26 subgroup; on the contrary, 1190A and 1154A alleles were significantly increased in subjects with MMSE 26 compared to MMSE > 26 subjects group (p = 0.046 and p = 0.027, respectively). Subjects ranged from 85 to 99 years of age, with a mean S.D. of 89.8 ± 2.8 years; MMSE: 25.3 ± 2.5 points; 27.3% males. As expected, the percentage of subjects carrying at least one vasde4 APOE4 allele was significantly reduced in long-lived subjects compared to younger individuals (8.1% versus 4.2%, p = 0.03). All VEGF polymorphisms were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) for the entire cohort of subjects; interestingly, a statistically significant difference was observed between 2578 and 1190 HWE frequencies in young/elderly subjects compared to long-lived subjects (2578: p = 0.03; 1190: p = 0.043). Concerning the haplotype analysis, the four SNPs showed a linkage disequilibrium for each pair of loci (2578/634 pany D value: 0.86). Inferred haplotype frequencies are shown in Table 2; interestingly, haplotype AAGG was significantly increased in long-lived subjects (p = 0.03) compared to younger individuals. As shown in Table 2, other estimated haplotypes (i.e. CGGC, AAAG, AAAC, AGGG) were differently distributed among young/elderly and long-lived subjects in terms of allele frequencies, but they failed to reach a statistically significant difference. Genotype analysis failed to find different distributions of C(2578)A, G(1190)A, G(1154)A and G(634)C polymorphisms in young subjects compared to moderately elderly individuals (Table 1). In contrast, we observed significant differences in terms of genotype and allelic distribution between the group of individuals aged more than 85 years and the two above-mentioned groups. Specifically, 2578AA and 1190AA genotypes were differently distributed between the groups. Subjects carrying the at-risk genotypes had ORs increased up to two-fold (Table 1). We observed some differences between young/elderly and long-lived individuals when subjects were stratified according to gender (Supplementary data); in particular, 2578AA, 1190AA genotypes and 1190A allele were significantly over-represented in women and not in men. Furthermore, through the permutation approach on single markers, we confirmed the previously reported results with the univariate approach (2578C/A, 2, p = 0.02; 1190G/A, 2, p = 0.04).

4. Discussion

Lifespan is the result of interactions between thousands of genes and non-genetic factors. Although in the past five years we have seen the identification of several candidate genes for longevity, only the role of APOE has so far been consistently confirmed (Christensen et al., 2006). The results of the present study, for the first time, support a role for specific VEGF polymorphisms and haplotypes as an advantage for lifespan extension, at least in the cohort of Italian individuals analyzed.

The marked variability in the genetic background represents an important factor leading to different results in case-control studies. Genetic heterogeneity might explain the different impact of the VEGF variants on disease risks: for instance, we recently observed that C(2578)A and G(1190)A polymorphisms are associated with type 1 diabetes in Italy, while in Finnish individuals G(1190) and G(1154)A variants protect from type 1 diabetes and delay its onset (Del Bo et al., 2006a). However, to explain why different combinations of VEGF genotypes significantly associate with type 1 diabetes in different countries, it has been suggested a possible linkage between VEGF and other genes, such as MHC genes.

VEGF gene is highly polymorphic, with at least 25 different polymorphisms, which are organized into haplotypes, with severalPopulation (Chiappelli et al., 2006). Furthermore, the (2578A) allele was higher in APOE 4-positive MCI patients who developed AD than in those who did not. All these findings support the role of VEGF in the deterioration rate of cognitive performance in both preclinical and clinical AD. Due to the low number of long-lived subjects carrying at least one APOE 4 allele (n = 14) in the present study, we are unable to analyze the interaction between VEGF and APOE genotypes. Longitudinal studies will be required to verify how many subjects included in the present study will develop cognitive deficits, as well as MCI or AD. In addition, VEGF variability in subjects with moderate/severe dementia (having an MMSE score of 22) should be investigated.

Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.05.003.

References
R., Lindholm, C., Snowden, J., Adamson, J., Sadovnick, A.D., Rollinson, S., Cannon, A., Dwosh, E., Neary, D., Melquist, S., Richardson, A., Dickson, D., Berger, Z., Eriksen, J., Robinson, T., Zehr, C., Dickey, C.A., Crook, R., Mowan, E., Mann, D., Boeve, B., Feldman, H., Hutton, M. Mutations in progranulin cause tau-negative frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome Nature , Barrett, J.C., Fry, B., Maller, J., Daly, M.J. Haploview: analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics , Carmeliet, P., Angiogenesis in health and disease. Nat. Med. , Chiappelli, M., Borroni, B., Archetti, S., Calabrese, E., Corsi, M.M., Franceschi, M., Padovani, A., Licastro, F. VEGF gene and phenotype relation with Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment. Rejuvenation Res. , Christensen, K., Johnson, T.E., Vaupel, J.W. The quest for genetic determinants of human longevity: challenges and insights. Nat. Rev. Genet. , Del Bo, R., Comi, G.P., Bresolin, N., Castelli, E., Conti, E., Degiuli, A., Ausenda, C.D., Scarlato, G. The apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele causes a faster decline of cognitive performance in Down's syndrome subjects. J. Neurol. Sci. , Del Bo, R., Scarlato, M., Grezzi, S., Martinelli-Boneschi, F., Fenoglio, C., Galbiati, S., Virgilio, R., Galimberti, D., Galimberti, G., Crimi, M., Ferrarese, C., Scarpini, E., Bresolin, N., Comi, G.P. Vascular endothelial growth factor gene variability is associated with an increased risk for AD. Ann. Neurol. , Deo,R., Scarlato,M., Grezzi,S., Maestroni,A .Sjolind,L .Forsblom,C .Wessman,M .Groop,P.H .Comi,G.P .Bresolin,N .Luzi,L .Zerbini,G  a.Vascular endothelial growth factor gene variability and type  diabetes: evidence of a protective role. Immunogenetics , Del Bo, R., Scarlato, M., Grezzi, S., Martinelli-Boneschi, F., Corti, S., Locatelli, F., Santoro, D., Pelle, A., Briani, C., Cardini, M., Siciliano, G., Mancuso, M., Murri, L., Bresolin, N., Comi, G.P. b. Absence of angiogenic gene modification in Italian ALS patients. Neurobiol. Aging [epub ahead of print].

Considering the complexity of the mechanisms leading to transcriptional and translational regulation of VEGF expression, additional polymorphisms (also located within the VEGF coding region) may be responsible for the positive association with long-term aging. Furthermore, this study opens the question about the role of other angiogenic factors strikingly similar to VEGF on successful aging; in fact, angiogenin and progranulin have been recently associated with neurodegenerative disorders and represent molecules with important neuroprotective activities (Baker et al.,