any other genetic variants associated with human aging using a genome-wide association study approach.

In recent years, there has been a growing body of evidence that genetics plays a crucial role in human aging. Up to 30% of those who live to their mid-80s have their lifespan determined by genetic variation. It is likely that an even greater genetic contribution is required for survival to older ages. As genes implicated in age-related diseases such as cancer and neuronal disease have been shown to play a role in affecting human lifespan, the authors of this study selected the 10 most promising late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) susceptibility genes identified through several recent large genome-wide association studies (GWAS). These 10 LOAD genes were tested for association with human aging using the most significant single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) found in previous studies. The dataset used comprised 1385 samples with documented age at death (AAD), ranging from 58-108 years, with a mean age at death of 80.2 years.

The study found that apart from the APOE locus (rs2075650), which showed compelling evidence of association with risk on human lifespan (p < 5.27 x 10^-4), none of the other LOAD gene loci demonstrated significant evidence of association. Additionally, no genome-wide significant SNPs were discovered when age at death was used as a quantitative trait. The authors suggest that increasing sample size and statistical power will be imperative to detect genuine aging-associated variants in future studies.

The molecular genetics underlying the human aging process is complex and likely due to numerous genes and environmental factors, each exerting a small effect. Identifying genuine aging genes may uncover master genes that increase our understanding of many age-related diseases. This study highlights issues relating to the analysis of genome-wide association studies data from different centers and the bioinformatic approach required to distinguish spurious genome-wide significant signals from real SNP associations.

In conclusion, this study investigated whether known LOAD genes play a role in human aging and searched for any other genetic variants associated with human aging using a genome-wide association study approach. While the study found compelling evidence of association between the APOE locus and risk on human lifespan, no other significant evidence of association was demonstrated. The authors suggest that increasing sample size and statistical power will be imperative to detect genuine aging-associated variants in future studies.Candidate genetic risk factors associated with human survival and aging may merit further study. There are several biological pathways that have been reported to be important in human aging, including lipid/cholesterol metabolism [GO:0006629; GO:0008203] (APOE, PON1, CETP) (Barzilai et al., 2003; de Chaves and Narayanaswami, 2008; Efrat and Aviram, 2010), immune system processes [GO:0002376] (IL6 and IL10) (Jylhava and Hurme, 2009), drug metabolism [KEGG:hsa00982] (GSTT1) (Glatt et al., 2007; Taioli et al., 2001), energy metabolism in mitochondria (SIRT3) (Polito et al., 2010), and the insulin receptor signaling pathway [GO:0008286] (IGF1R, FOXO3A, KLOTHO) (Arking et al., 2005; Suh et al., 2008; Willcox et al., 2008).

2. Methods

Through collaborative efforts, we were able to draw on combined sample GWAS datasets and analyze subject-level genotype data from 1385 subjects (1047 LOAD cases and 338 controls) with documented age at death (AAD) (Table 1). The AAD histogram follows a normal distribution (Fig. 1), with a mean AAD of 80.2 years of age (SD 8.9 years). All of this data were subject to subsequent quality control (QC) procedures and analysis. The data analysis was performed using the PLINK software package (pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/~pedro/ plink) release 1.06 (Purcell et al., 2007).

Insights into human aging have been gained from studying model organisms. The extension of lifespan can be achieved by manipulating a few genes in laboratory animals, such as flies, worms, and mice (Kenyon, 2010). The insulin/insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling pathway has a well-established role in influencing lifespan within model organisms.

2.1. Datasets; pooling and QC

We obtained data from nine research centers, three from the USA and six from the UK (GERAD1 Consortium). The GERAD1 sample comprised up to 3941 AD cases and 7848 controls. A subset of this sample has been used in this study, comprising 3333 cases and 1225 elderly screened controls genotyped at the Sanger Institute on the Illumina (San Diego, CA, USA) 610-quad chip. These samples were recruited by the Medical Research Council (MRC) Genetic Resource for AD (Cardiff University; Kings College, London; Cambridge University; Trinity College, Dublin), the Alzheimer's Research Trust (ART) Collaboration (University of Nottingham; University of Manchester; University of Southampton; University of Bristol; Queens University, Belfast; the Oxford Project to Investigate Memory and Ageing [OPTIMA], Oxford University); Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA; MRC PRION Unit, University College London, London; and the South East Region AD project (LASER-AD), University College London; Competence Network of Dementia (CND) and Department of Psychiatry, University of Bonn, Germany; and the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) AD Genetics Initiative.

All AD cases met criteria for either probable (National Institute of Neurology and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association [now known as the Alzheimer's Association] [NINCDS-ADRDA], Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Ed [DSM-IV]) or definite (Consortium to Establish a registry for Alzheimer's Disease [CERAD]) AD. All elderly controls screened for dementia using the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) or Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog) were determined to be free from dementia at neuropathological examination or had a Braak score of 2.5 or lower. All studies used the Illumina 610 QuadChip, except the Mayo study which used the Illumina HumanHap300 chip (Carrasquillo et al., 2009).

Table 1: Summary of sample information

Dataset Sample AD status Gender Genotyping Mean AAD Origin size (AD/controls) (male/female) chip (AD/controls) 

Mayo 434 220/214 246/188 Illumina 300 73.5/71.7 USA 
NIMH 46 46/0 12/34 Illumina 610 78.1/- USA 
WashU Form Merged Data 3. This was then used in a principal components analysis, which revealed 16 individuals as genetic outliers. These were removed from Merged Data 2. Abbreviation: GR, genotyping rate. Fast, Oxford, and London, NIMH, and Washington University (WashU), where possible. All GWAS datasets were transformed into the same PLINK format (1 and 2 coding in PLINK.bed.fam and .bim format). Any samples that overlapped between GWAS datasets were removed. Each sample was checked individually for discrepancies between AAD and age at sampling (AAS). Samples with age at sampling greater than AAD were removed from further analysis. Polymorphisms (SNPs) present on the Illumina 300 chip enabled us to merge all the datasets. AAD information was extracted from the Mayo dataset (Carrasquillo et al., 2009) using the --keep and --make-bed command in PLINK. This was repeated for samples from the Alzheimer's Research UK (ARUK) data (which encompassed centers in Nottingham, Bristol, Manchester, Belfast, Centre London Oxford NIMH WashU Nottingham Mayo Manchester Bristol Belfast). Age at death (yrs) was removed from further analysis. Data merging was performed using --bmerge in PLINK in Consensus call mode. QC procedures were undertaken for the merged data to account for population stratification and differences in the Illumina chip versions. Data merging and QC procedures are illustrated in Fig. 2. The merged data were separated into two GWAS datasets (A and B) using the --geno 0.05 command in PLINK. For both of the GWAS datasets, the following QC procedures were carried out in order: SNPs with genotyping rate less than (--geno) were excluded from further analysis; SNPs with a minor allele frequency (MAF) less than (--maf) were excluded from further analysis. A list of SNPs with MAF between and was generated (--freq). Within this shortlist, SNPs with a genotyping rate less than (--geno) were excluded (--exclude) from further analysis. SNPs with a Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium p-value less than (--hwe --hwe-all) were excluded from further analysis, irrespective of status (AD cases or controls). Individuals with a genotyping rate less than (--mind) were excluded from further analysis. Using the QC'd GWAS dataset A, a linkage disequilibrium (LD) pruned subset of 85,826 SNPs common to all arrays and HapMap data (--indep-pairwise) was generated. No SNPs within this list had an LD r-value greater than 0.2 across sliding windows (window size of 50 SNPs and 5 SNPs to shift the window). This subset of SNPs was used by EIGENSTRAT (Price et al., 2006) for the following calculations: A. to detect genetic outliers defined by any individual whose ancestry is at least 6 SD from the mean on one of the top 10 axes of variation; B. to calculate principal components (PCs); C. To generate a population stratification plot, HapMap data were used as the reference dataset. We used a filtered version of HapMap data (European [CEU], Asian [CHB/JPT], Yoruba [YRI]) release #27 in PLINK binary format (.bed.bim and .fam) from the PLINK website (Purcell et al., 2007). EIGENSTRAT was used to calculate the genomic control inflation factor (λ). This was performed iteratively using the GWAS dataset A with AAD including between 1 to 10 PCs. Each calculation generated a single value, thus a total of 100 values were generated. The number of PCs to be included as covariates was determined when the lowest value was acquired after comparison of all 100 values. Extraction of PCs from EIGENSTRAT results is shown in Fig. 3. The box and whisker plot show the age at death (AAD) distribution for each center. The central box represents the distance between the first and third quartiles with the median marked with a diamond. The circles indicate that an individual's AAD is outside 2 times the interquartile range. The dashed rectangle highlights that the majority of the data have a similar range of AAD with the exception of the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) and Mayo data. Dataset B consisted of SNPs only on the Illumina 610 chip. The two GWAS datasets were merged using the same methods (--bmerge) as described above (shown as merged data 2 in Fig. 2). Frequency due to interchip and intercohort differences can cause an inflation of the type I error rate. AStatsDirect. For each of the LOAD susceptibility gene loci, the allele frequency was calculated and stratified by AAD category. The effect of the minor allele of each SNP involved in life span is illustrated in Figure 6. Haploview (version 4.1) was used to visualize GWAS results in Figure 5 (Barrett et al., 2005). A histogram of AAD from all individuals that passed QC was drawn using StatsDirect software (version 2.7.8) in Figure 1. The separation into five AAD categories was used only to facilitate visualization of MAF of candidate SNPs in the different age ranges and was not used to generate p-values. Power calculations were undertaken using QUANTO version 1.2.4. The required sample size was estimated using an additive model created by the software.

3. Results 

3.1 Dataset composition and QC 
The full range of AAD (58-108 years) was separated into five AAD categories, the boundaries of which were selected to ensure each group contains an approximately equal number of samples. This ensures SNP minor allele frequencies across each of the age categories are directly comparable. This was done because the combined GWAS dataset has a sample size of 1385 before QC. After QC, four participants were removed for a low genotyping rate (--mind 0.05) from the Mayo GWAS (Carrasquillo et al., 2010). A single sample from Bristol was removed due to discrepancies between AAD and age at onset (AAO). An additional 16 samples were removed as genetic outliers by PCs analysis using EIGENSTRAT. This included 14 samples from the Mayo data, one from NIMH, and one from Belfast. The mean AAD in the pooled dataset (post QC) was greater than 80 years of age.

The multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot showed three distinct clusters. As expected, each cluster represents different population ancestry: CEU, middle right; CHB/JPT, bottom left; and YRI, top left (Figure 7). UK, USA, and HapMap_ CEU samples formed a single cluster. On closer inspection, slight deviation between UK and USA samples exists, and this was accounted for by including PCs as covariates. After stringent QC, there were 1364 samples (1031 LOAD cases and 333 controls, 608 male and 756 female) and 528,430 SNPs remaining for further analysis.

3.2 Analysis and results 
Genomic control inflation factor ((cid:1)) was calculated using EIGENSTRAT by iteratively including 0 to 10 PCs (Price et al., 2006). We found that including six PCs generated the lowest genomic control inflation factor ((cid:1) = 1.003). Assessment of the ten LOAD susceptibility genes yielded compelling evidence of association of APOE locus (rs2075650) with human aging (uncorrected p = 5.27 xX 10(cid:3)4), which withstood multiple testing after Bonferroni correction for ten independent tests (Table 3A).

Minor Allele Frequency (MAF) analysis was performed on ten late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) genes with respect to aging. Figure 6 shows the relationship between single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) MAFs and human aging, where age at death (AAD) is separated into five categories. Each AAD category contains roughly equal amounts of samples to avoid bias in sample sizes. All ten known LOAD genes are shown together with the APOE locus highlighted in bold (all other loci in gray). The APOE locus (rs2075650) showed significant association with aging, with MAF = 0.27, AAD = 89 years of age (n = 1136), and MAF = 0.21, AAD > 89 years of age (n = 228). None of the other gene loci were significantly associated with aging.

In addition to examining the association of these ten LOAD susceptibility genes with aging, we performed a genome-wide analysis that includes all SNPs on the Illumina platforms after QC. The genome-wide significance threshold was calculated (p = 1.04 xX 10(cid:3)7) using Bonferroni correction for the number of independent tests (n = 483,066), which was estimated using the method we have previously described (Shi et al., 2010). There were 41 SNPs with p-value <= 5 xX 10(cid:3)5. These SNPs span the genome, representing 35 distinct signals (pairwise r2 < 0.8) across thirteen chromosomes. Twenty-four of them are located within 20 kilobase (kb) of known human genes with a widethat a sample size between 3000 and 15,000 is required to have 80% power to detect an association with a minor allele frequency (MAF) above 0.05, whereas approximately 4000 to 19,000 samples will be needed for 95% power. However, this estimation should be interpreted with caution as it is based on several assumptions, and gene-environment interaction has not been taken into account.

The analysis of the 10 documented late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) susceptibility loci with human aging showed no evidence of association with the remaining LOAD genes. This suggests that these genes are genuine LOAD genes with no detectable effects on human aging. However, it is still possible that these genes may have a weak effect on aging that our dataset was not large enough to detect.

It is important to note that advancing age is one of the most significant risk factors for LOAD, and the prevalence of LOAD increases with age. Therefore, understanding whether genes involved in LOAD play a role in successful aging is crucial. A longitudinal study following subjects for 18 years showed that the APOE gene affects the risk of mortality in individuals aged 75 and older. The risk was increased by 22% in those carrying the APOE ε4 allele, decreased by 28% in those carrying the APOE ε2 allele, and individuals carrying APOE ε3 allele showed no significant difference in risk.

The Manhattan plot shown in Fig. 5 represented a scenario before removal of five false positive SNPs. Comparing SNPs between NIMH and WashU data showed no significant difference in allele frequency, whereas five SNPs showed significant difference in allele frequency comparing Mayo data with the major allele A. No effect was seen for individuals carrying AG genotype.

It is not surprising that the two SNPs which showed genome-wide level of significance overlap with the five SNPs that showed significant bias between Mayo and WashU data, as the age at death of the Mayo data is significantly younger. It is not possible to correct for center, as the spread of the age at death is crucial in detecting genuine aging-associated variants. The difference in allele frequency due to samples with a young age at death in Mayo and an old age at death in WashU may well represent genuine associations. Including center as a covariate would abolish our ability to detect this effect.

In summary, stratification was tested using HapMap data #23 as reference, and the UK, USA, and HapMap CEU samples formed a single cluster. The analysis of SNPs showed their chromosome number, base pair position, gene name, p value, and direction of effect. The processed text has corrected spelling errors, split combined words correctly, removed redundancy and corrected grammatical errors where necessary.A much larger sample size is required to detect an association with common variants. With rare exceptions, common variants are known to exert only small to moderate effects, according to previous studies of many complex disorders and traits (Bodmer and Bonilla, 2008). Presenting our data on genes that lie between 10^5 and 10^8, while not reaching genome-wide significance, may enable groups to identify genes for future study, especially if there is overlap with other studies. Additionally, these data could be used as part of a larger meta-analysis.

In this study, we performed an association test of the top GWAS LOAD genes (APOE, CLU, PICALM, CR1, BIN1, ABCA7, MS4A6A, CD33, CD2AP, and EPHA1) with human aging using the most significant SNPs found in previous studies. Apart from the well-documented association between APOE and LOAD, the association with the other nine genes was identified recently through large GWAS, each with a sample size of over 10,000 (Harold et al., 2009; Hollingworth et al., 2011; Lambert et al., 2009; Naj et al., 2011).

The results of our analysis provided compelling evidence of an association between the APOE locus (rs2075650) and human aging (p = 5.27 x 10^(-4)) (Table 3A) with a risk effect based on the analysis of 1364 samples using AAD as a continuous trait. The minor allele frequency plot (Fig. 6) shows that the MAF of this SNP significantly decreases in the old AAD category (MAF = 0.21; AAD >89 years of age; n = 228) compared with the other four younger AAD categories (MAF = 0.27; AAD <= 89; n = 1136). Individuals homozygous for the minor allele G showed significantly lowered AAD (p = 0.002) compared with individuals homozygous for the major allele.

GWAS provide a method of identifying common genetic variations associated with disease or phenotype in an unbiased manner. However, it comes with the price of multiple testing given that many thousands of SNPs are tested simultaneously, and a very stringent significance threshold (p = 5 x 10^(-8)) is often used to infer a genome-wide significant association and to avoid a large number of false positives (Bertram and Tanzi, 2008). Factors associated with aging have been addressed by correcting for AD status. However, it is possible that the APOE association with age in the AD group could be due to its involvement in the duration and severity of AD (Dal Forno et al., 2002). We do not, however, have clinical pathological features for these samples and therefore cannot explore these endophenotypes.

We have conducted an analysis using AAD as a quantitative trait; this is believed to provide more power compared with the traditional case/control approach. The advantage of statistical power gained compared with the case/control analysis is dependent upon the design of the study. For example, dichotomizing the AAD distribution into cases and controls would give less power than comparing the low and high extremes of the quantitative trait (Plomin et al., 2009). Increasing statistical power by including more samples is imperative to elucidate genuine genetic associations in our study. Including more samples with extreme phenotypes (e.g., exceptional longevity nonagenarian and centenarians) would give more power than addition of samples of average AAD (Plomin et al., 2009; Tan et al., 2010).

Considering that pure controls where individuals die without experiencing any age-related diseases probably do not exist, we considered it valid to undertake an analysis using both sets. However, due to the large number of AD cases that have been used relative to the number of controls (about three-quarters of the total), any association with human aging implicated in the study may be biased and specific to the AD population. We acknowledge this as a limitation. However, using just the control population would result in insufficient numbers for a valid analysis. Follow-up studies using only control samples will be required to confirm these associations.

Domestic and international collaborations are often required to raise sufficiently large sample sizes in order to have adequate power to detect genuine disease associations. This is especially true for SNPs with a small effect size. However, such combined analysis can, in some instances, generate new problems. For instance, interchip and intercohort differences could create spurious genome-wide significant associations. More importantly, these SNPs may pass all conventional QC filtering (e.g., Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium p-value, minor allele frequency, and genotyping rate threshold) increasing the likelihood of generating false-positive results, which are notIn this study, the goal is to achieve maximum power to detect novel aging-associated variants. Ideally, this test is better performed using only control samples, as the AD group is likely affected by different environmental and genetic factors in addition to aging. 

Acknowledgements:
Molecular Neuroscience and Reta Lilla Weston Laboratories, Institute of Neurology, London, UK; Simon Mead, MRC Prion Unit, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK; Nick Fox and Martin Rossor, Dementia Research Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, University College London, Institute of Neurology, London, UK; John Collinge, MRC Prion Unit, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK; Wolfgang Maier, Frank Jessen, Reiner Heun and Heike Klsch from the Department of Psychiatry at the University of Bonn in Bonn Germany; Britta Schrmann from the Department of Psychiatry and Institute for Molecular Psychiatry at the University of Bonn in Bonn Germany; Hendrik van den Bussche from the Institute of Primary Medical Care at the University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf in Germany; Isabella Heuser from the Department of Psychiatry at Charit in Berlin Germany; Johannes Kornhuber from the Department of Psychiatry at the University of Erlangen in Nrnberg Germany; Jens Wiltfang from LVR-Hospital Essen from the Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy at the University Duisburg-Essen in Germany; Martin Dichgans from the Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research and Department of Neurology at Klinikum der Universitt Mnchen in Munich Germany; Lutz Frlich from Central Institute of Mental Health Medical Faculty Mannheim at the University of Heidelberg in Germany; Harald Hampel from the Department of Psychiatry Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy at Goethe University in Frankfurt Germany; Michael Hll from the Centre for Geriatric Medicine and Section of Gerontopsychiatry and Neuropsychology at the Medical School, University of Freiburg in Germany; Dan Rujescu from Alzheimer Memorial Center and Geriatric Psychiatry Branch, Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany; Alison Goate from the Departments of Psychiatry, Neurology and Genetics at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, MO, USA; John S.K. Kauwe from the Department of Biology at Brigham Young University in Provo, UT, USA; Carlos Cruchaga, Petra Nowotny, John C. Morris and Kevin Mayo from the Departments of Psychiatry, Neurology and Genetics at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, MO, USA; Gill Livingston, Nicholas J. Bass, Hugh Gurling and Andrew McQuillin from the Department of Mental Health Sciences at University College London in London UK; Rhian Gwilliam and Panagiotis Deloukas from The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Wellcome Trust Genome Campus in Hinxton Cambridge UK; Markus M. Nthen from the Department of Genomics at Life and Brain Center at the University of Bonn in Bonn Germany; Peter Trust from Medical Research Council (MRC), Alzheimers Research Trust (ART) and the Welsh Assembly Government. ART supported sample collections at Kings College London, the South West Dementia Bank, Universities of Cambridge, Nottingham, Manchester and Belfast. The Belfast group acknowledges support from the Alzheimers Society Ulster Garden Villages N. Ireland R&D Office and the Royal College of Physicians/Dunhill Medical Trust. The MRC and Mercers Institute for Research on Ageing supported the Trinity College group. The South West Dementia Brain Bank acknowledges support from Bristol Research into Alzheimers and Care of the Elderly. The Charles Wolfson Charitable Trust supported the OPTIMA group. Washington University was funded by NIH grants, Barnes Jewish Foundation and the Charles and Joanne Knight Alzheimers Research Initiative. Patient recruitment for the MRC Prion Unit/UCL Department of Neurodegenerative Disease collection was supported by the UCLH/UCL Biomedical Centre. LASER-AD was funded by Lundbeck SA. The Bonn group was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), Competence Network Dementia and Competence Network Degenerative Dementia, and by the Alfried Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach-Stiftung. The GERAD1 Consortium also used samples ascertained by the NIMH AD Genetics Initiative.

Disclosure statement:
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. Approval was obtained from the ethics committee or institutional review board of each institution responsible for the ascertainment and collection of samples. Written informed consent was obtained for all individuals who participated in this study.

Acknowledgements:
We thank all of our collaborators who provided data for this study (ARUK and GERADThe text seems to be a list of references for scientific articles related to genetic research on aging and Alzheimer's disease. The text is correctly formatted, but there are some errors in spelling, punctuation, and grammar. Here's the processed text:

M.M., Möbus, S., Jöckel, K.H., Klopp, N., Wichmann, H.E., Pankratz, V.S., Sando, S.B., Aasly, J.O., Barcikowska, M., Wszolek, Z.K., Dickson, D.W., Graff-Radford, N.R., Petersen, R.C., van Duijn, C.M., Breteler, M.M., Ikram, M.A., Destefano, A.L., Fitzpatrick, A.L., Lopez, O., Launer, L.J., Seshadri, S., Berr, C., Campion, D., Epelbaum, J., Dartigues, J.F., Tzourio, C., Alperovitch, A., Lathrop, M., Feulner,T.M., Friedrich,P., Riehle,C. , Krawczak,M. , Schreiber,S. , Mayhaus,M. , Nicolhaus,S. , Wagenpfeil,S. , Steinberg,S. , Stefansson,H. , Stefansson,K. , Snaedal,J. , Bjornsson,S. , Jonsson,P.V. , Chouraki,V. , Genier-Boley,B. , Hiltunen,M. , Soininen,H. , Combarros,O. , Zelenika,D. , Delepine,M. , Bullido,M.J. , Pasquier,F. , Mateo,I. , Frank-Garcia,A. , Porcellini,E. , Hanon,O. , Coto,E. , Alvarez,V. , Bosco,P. , Siciliano,G. , Mancuso,M. , Panza,F. , Solfrizzi,V. , Nacmias,B. , Sorbi,S., Bossu, P., Piccardi, P., Arosio, B., Annoni, G., Seripa, D., Pilotto, A., Scarpini, E., Galimberti, D., Brice, A., Hannequin, D., Licastro,F., Jones,L., Holmans,P.A., Jonsson,T., Riemenschneider,M., Morgan,K., Younkin,S.G., Owen,M.J., O'Donovan,M.C., Amouyel,P., Williams,J. Common variants at ABCA7, MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are associated with Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Genet.

Holzenberger,M. , Dupont,J. , Ducos,B. , Leneuve,P. , Glon,A. , Even,P.C. , Cervera,P. , Le Bouc,Y. IGF-1 receptor regulates lifespan and resistance to oxidative stress in mice. Nature.

Iachine,I.A. , Holm,N.V. , Harris,J.R. , Begun,A.Z. , Iachina,M.K., Laitinen,M. , Kaprio,J. , Yashin,A.I. How heritable is individual susceptibility to death? The results of an analysis of survival data on Danish, Swedish and Finnish twins.Twin Res.

Jylhävä,J . Hurme,M . Gene variants as determinants of longevity: focus on the inflammatory factors.Pflugers Arch.

Kenyon,C.J . The genetics of ageing.Nature.

[DOI:/nature] [Pubmed:] Lambert,J.C. , Heath,S. , Even,G. , Campion,D. , Sleegers,K. , Hiltunen,M. , Combarros,O. , Zelenika,D. , Bullido,M.J. , Tavernier,B. , Leten- ics: the implications of systematic meta-analyses.Nat. Rev. Neurosci.

Bodmer,W . Bonilla,C . Common and rare variants in multifactorial susceptibility to common diseases.Nat. Genet.

Carrasquillo,M.M . Belbin,O . Zou,F . Allen,M . Ertekin-Taner,N . Ansari,M . Wilcox,S.L . Kashino,M.R . Ma,L . Younkin,L.H . Younkin,S.G . Younkin,C.S . Dincman,T.A . Howard,M.E . Howell,C.C . Stanton,C.M . Watson,C.M . Crump,M . Vitart,V . Hayward,C . Hastie,N.D . Rudan,I . Campbell,H . Polasek,O . Brown,K . Passmore,P , Craig,D, McGuinness,B, Todd,S, KehBossu, P., Piccardi, P., Arosio, B., Annoni, G., Seripa, D., Pilotto, A., Scarpini, E., Galimberti, D., Brice, A., Hannequin, D., Licastro, F., Jones, L., Holmans, P.A., Jonsson, T., Riemenschneider, M., Morgan, K., Younkin, S.G., Owen, M.J., O'Donovan, M., Amouyel, P., Williams, J., 2011. Common variants at ABCA7, MS4A6A/MS4A4E, EPHA1, CD33 and CD2AP are associated with Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Genet. 43, 429-435.
Abraham, R., Hollingworth, P., Sims, R., Gerrish, A., Hamshere, M.L., Pahwa, J.S., Moskvina, V., Dowzell, K., Williams, A., Jones, N., Thomas, C., Stretton, A., Morgan, A.R., Lovestone, S., Powell, J.F. Proitsi,P. Lupton,M.K. Brayne,C. Rubinsztein,D.C. Gill,M. Lawlor,B. Lynch,A. Brown,K.S. Passmore,P.A. Craig,D. McGuinness,B. Todd,S. Holmes,C. Mann,D. Smith,A.D. Love,S. Kehoe,P.G. Hardy,J. Mead,S. Fox,N.C. Rossor,M.N.Collinge,J.M.Maier,W.Jessen,F.Schurmann,B.van den Lambert,J.C.Heath,S.Even,G.Campion,D.Sleegers,K.Hiltunen,M.Combarros,O.Zelenika,D.Bullido,M.J.Tavernier,B.Leten-
Panza, F., D'Introno, A., Capurso, C., Colacicco, A.M., Seripa, D., Pilotto, A., Santamato, A., Capurso, A., Solfrizzi, V., Lipoproteins, vascular-related genetic factors, and human longevity. Rejuvenation Res. 14(2), 173-182.
Panza, F., Frisardi, V., Capurso, C., D'Introno, A., Colacicco, A.M., Seripa, D., Pilotto, A., Vendemiale,G. Capurso,A. Solfrizzi,V. Apolipoprotein E,dementia,and human longevity. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 58(7), 1319-1321.
Perls,T.T.Bubrick,E.Wager,C.G.Vijg,J.Kruglyak,L.Siblings of centenarians live longer. Lancet 346(8967), 857-858.
Perls,T.T.Wilmoth,J.Levenson,R.Drinkwater,M.Cohen,M.Bogan,H.Joyce,E.Brewster,S.Kunkel,L.Puca,A.A life-long sustained mortality advantage of siblings of centenarians. Proc.Natl.Acad.Sci.U.S.A. 99(12), 8442-8447.
Plomin,R.Haworth,C.M.Davis,O.S.Common disorders are quantitative traits.Nat.Rev.Genet.10(12), 872-878.
Polito,L.Kehoe,P.G.Forloni,G.Albani,D.The molecular genetics of sirtuins: association with human longevity and age-related diseases.Int.J.Mol.Epidemiol.Genet.1(2), 214-225.
Price,A.L.Patterson,N.J.Plenge,R.M.Weinblatt,M.E.Shadick,N.A.Reich,D.Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in genome-wide association studies. Nat. Genet. 38(8), 904-909.
Purcell,S.Neale,B.Todd-Brown,K.Thomas,L.Ferreira,M.A.Bender,D.Maller,J.Sklar,P.de Bakker,P.I.W.Daly,M.J.Sham,P.C.PLINK: a tool set for whole-genome association and population-based linkage analyses. Am.J.Hum.Genet.81(3), 559-575.
Rosvall,L.Rizzuto,D.Wang,H.X.Winblad,B.Graff,C.Fratiglioni,L.APOE-related mortality: effect of dementia, cardiovascular disease and gender. Neurobiol.Aging 33(2), 385-392.
Sebastiani,P.Montano,M.Puca,A.Solovieff,N.Kojima,T.Wang,M.C.Melista,E.Meltzer,M.Fischer,SBaldwin, C.T., Green, R.C., Rogaeva, E., St. George-Hyslop, P., Arnold, S.E., Barber, R., Beach, T., Bigio, E.H., Bowen, J.D., Boxer, A., Burke, J.R., Cairns, N.J., Carlson, C.S., Carney, R.M., Carroll, S.L., Chui, H.C., Clark, D.G., Corneveaux, J., Cotman, C.W., Cummings, J.L., DeCarli, C., DeKosky, S.T., Diaz-Arrastia, R., Dick, M., Dickson, D.W., Ellis, W.G., Faber, K.M., Fallon, K.B., Farlow, M.R., Ferris, S., Frosch, M.P., Galasko, D.R., Ganguli, M., Gearing, M., Geschwind, D.H., Ghetti, B., Gilbert, J.R., Gilman, S., Giordani, B., Glass, J.D., Growdon, J.H.,
Hamilton,
R.L.,
Harrell,
L.E.,
Head,
E.,
Honig,
L.S.,
Hulette,
C.M.,
Hyman,
B.T.,
Jicha,
G.A.,
Jin,
L.W.,
Johnson,
N.,
Karlawish,
J.,
Karydas,
A.,
Kaye,
J.A.,
Kim,
R.,
Koo,
E.H.,
Kowall,
N.W.,
Lah,
J.J.,
Levey,
A.I.,
Lieberman,
A.P.,
Lopez,
O.L.,
Mack,
W.J.,
Marson,
D.C.,
Martiniuk,
F.,
Mash,
D.C.,
Masliah,
E.,
McCormick,
W.C.,
McCurry,
S.M.,
McDavid,
A.N.,
McKee,
A.C.,
Mesulam,
M.,
Miller,
B.L.,
Miller,
C.A.,
Miller,
J.W., Parisi, J.E., Perl, D.P., Peskind, E., Petersen, R.C., Poon, W.W., Quinn, J.F., Rajbhandary, R.A., Raskind, M., Reisberg, B., Ringman, J.M., Roberson, E.D., Rosenberg, R.N., Sano, M., Schneider, L.S., Seeley, W., Shelanski, M.L., Slifer, M.A., Smith, C.D., Sonnen, J.A., Spina, S., Stern, R.A., Tanzi, R.E., Trojanowski, J.Q., Troncoso, J.C., Van Deerlin, V.M., Vinters, H.V., Vonsattel, J.P., Weintraub, S., Welsh-Bohmer, K.A., Williamson, J.,
Woltjer,
R.L.,
Cantwell,
L.B.,
Dombroski,
B.A.,
Beekly,
D.,
Lunetta,
K.L.,
Martin,
E.R.,
Kamboh,
M.I.,
Saykin,
A.J.,
Reiman,
E.M.,
Bennett,
D.A.,
Morris,
J.C.,
Montine,
T.J.,
Goate,
A.M.,
Blacker,
D.,
Tsuang,
D.W.,
Hakonarson,
H.,
Kukull,
W.A.,
Foroud,
T.M.,
Haines,
J.L.,
Mayeux,
R.,
Pericak-Vance,
M.A. and Farrer L.A. (2011). Common variants at MS4A4/MS4A6E, CD2AP, CD33, and EPHA1 are associated with late-onset Alzheimer's disease. Nat. Genet. 43, 436.