Interactive association of heat shock protein 70 gene variants with natural longevity in Xinjiang Hetian Uygur ethnicity.

JINXIN LI, WENQUAN NIU, YUE QI, WUFUER MAYILA, PENGCHENG ZHU, MUHUYATI, ZUHENG CHENG, and CHANGCHUN QIU from the Cardiology Department, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang, China; State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics; Sino-French Research Center for Life Science and Genomics, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Hypertension, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. 

Mounting evidence suggests that all organisms at the cellular level respond to stress by synthesizing heat shock proteins at the expense of other proteins. The ability of human cells to respond to heat stress decreases with aging. We thus investigate the association of 3 variants (A1267G in HSPA1B, G190C in HSPA1A, and T2437C in HSPA1L) in the heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) family with natural longevity in a Xinjiang Hetian Uygur population. A case-control study was conducted in 191 healthy individuals greater than 90 years of age and 53 naturally died persons 65-70 years of age. Promoter activity was evaluated by luciferase reporter assays. The data were analyzed using an EH/EH1 program for haplotype prediction and MDR software for gene-gene interaction. All studied variants satisfied the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in each group.

In single-locus analysis, no significant differences were found between long-lived people and short-lived people in the genotype/allele distributions of all variants. In contrast, haplotype analysis indicated that haplotypes A-G-C and A-C-T were more prevalent in long-lived people than short-lived people (P=0.026 and 0.017). The analysis conferred a 3.46- and 4.51-fold increased tendency for longevity, respectively (P=0.025 and 0.016). The haplotype results were strengthened by interaction analysis, which suggests an optimal model in which G190C and T2437C exert an interacting effect on longevity. No functional significance was observed between 190G and 190C alleles in both control and heat-inducible A549 cells (P>0.05). Taken together, our findings suggested that common genetic variants in Hsp70 family might contribute interactively to longevity the Xinjiang Hetian Uygur population. (Translational Research 2009;154:257-264)

Abbreviations: BMI - body mass index; Hsp70 - heat shock protein 70; PCR - polymerase chain reaction.

City (W.N.), and Grant XJ from the Science Fund of Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine.

Submitted for publication March,; revision submitted August,; accepted for publication August,

Reprint requests: Wenquan Niu, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Hypertension, Ruijin Second Road, Shanghai, China; e-mail: niuwenquan@yahoo.cn, Zuheng Cheng, The First Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University; e-mail: zuheng-cheng@yahoo.com.cn or Changchun Qiu, Peking Union Medical College, Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing, China; e-mail: qiucc@pumc.edu.cn, Tel: - /$ see front matter Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved. doi: /j.trsl.

We investigate the association of 3 variants (A1267G in HSPA1B, G190C in HSPA1A, and T2437C in HSPA1L) in heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) with natural longevity in a Xinjiang Hetian Uygur population. Using a candidate gene approach and the promoter functional assessment, our findings suggested that common genetic variants in Hsp70 family might contribute interactively to longevity in the Xinjiang Hetian Uygur population.

We, therefore, focused on a population of Xinjiang Hetian Uygur ethnicity, whose percentage of centenarians is significantly greater than the average level of the whole country, to explore the association of 3 common genetic variants, including A1267G (rs1061581, exon 1), G190C (rs1043618, 5' UTR), and T2437C (rs2227956, exon 2) in 3 polymorphic genes (HSPA1B, HSPA1A, and HSPA1L) ofWe amplified a fragment of 627 base pairs (bp) and digested it into 354 bp and 273 bp in the presence of the HSPA1L 2437 T variant. After enzyme treatment, the reaction mixture was separated on 2% agarose gels. The primers and amplification conditions for the other two variants were according to a report by Wu et al.13. We confirmed the accuracy of our screening method by directly sequencing amplified DNA from randomly selected samples (10%), and found no difference between the two methods (data not shown).

To analyze the activity of HSPA1A, we cloned the promoter fragment (488 bp) encompassing the G190C variant into the pMD19-T Easy vector (TaKaRa) using forward primer: 5-CGG GGT ACC CGC CAT GGA GAC CAA CAC CC (contained KpnI restriction site) and reverse primer: 5- CCG CTC GAG CCG GTT CCC TGC TCT CTG TC. We confirmed construction by restriction analysis and DNA sequencing (BGI LifeTech Co., Ltd., Fremont, Calif). The fragment was then inserted upstream of the firefly luciferase reporter gene at the EcoRI site added between the KpnI/XhoI sites of the pGL3-basic vector (Promega Corporation, Madison, Wisc). We confirmed insert orientation in the HSPA1A-pGL3 construct by restriction assay.

We cultivated human lung carcinoma A549 cells in FK12 medium containing 10% fetal calf serum and plated them into 6-well dishes (5x10^5/well), grown for 20 h, and transfected them by the lipofectin method (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Mass). We cotransfected test plasmid (HSPA1A-pGL3 4.0 mg) and internal Renilla luciferase control plasmid (phRL-TK, 1.0 mg) into cells, which were grown for 48 h. The cells were incubated at 42°C for 1 h and harvested 5 h after heat treatment. We prepared cell lysates, and measured luciferase activity with a luminometer by using a dual luciferase assay system. We measured each promoter activity directly by the ratio of the firefly luciferase level to the Renilla luciferase level. For each reporter construct, we performed five independent DNA extractions and phenotype measurements.

We drew blood samples, anticoagulated with 2% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, for DNA extraction and biochemical examination. We extracted genomic DNA from white blood cells using the proteinase K/phenol/chloroform purification method, followed by ethanol precipitation, and stored it in 10 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 1 mmol/L Na-EDTA, pH 8.0. We calibrated body weight and height, as well as blood pressure levels according to the last measurement at the time of survey. We calculated body mass index (BMI) as weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters. We measured blood pressure at the right arm with a conventional mercury sphygmomanometer after the subjects rested for at least 5 min. We determined plasma triglyceride, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, apolipoprotein A, and apolipoprotein B concentrations enzymatically using available kits and an autoanalyzer in Xinjiang Medical University. We estimated plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol using Friedewald's formula. We detected fasting plasma glucose by the Glucorder analyzer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland).

We determined the genotypes of the three studied variants by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism techniques. With respect to the HSPA1L 2437 T/C variant, the sequences of the forward and reverse primers were GTC CCT GGG GCT GGA GAC GG and GTG ATG ATA GGG TTA CAC ATC TGC T, respectively. We carried out PCR amplification in a PTC-200 MJ Research Peltier Thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Mass) for 35 cycles with denaturation at 94°C for 45 s, annealing at 60°C for 45 s, and extension at 72°C for 45 s. All amplifications were performed with 50-100 ng of DNA in a total volume of 25 μL containing 10 pmol of each primer, 200 mmol/L dNTPs, and 2.0 mmol/L.

We conducted database management and simple statistical calculations using SAS software version 9.1.3 (Institute Inc., Cary, NC). We compared the means of continuous variables using an unpaired t-test. We used the c2Age, years: 95.11 ± 4.81, 96.26 ± 5.89*, 94.21 ± 5.03, p=0.054 (T2437C TT (n=130), TC (n=54), CC (n=7) P trend). Age, years: 98.29 ± 6.40, 93.80 ± 4.41, 95.94 ± 5.72*, p=0.020. P<0.01 for A1267 G compared with AA; for G190C compared with CC; for T2437C compared with TC.

Because the G190C variant was located in the promoter region of HSPA1A, we assessed the promoter activity by measuring the ratio of firefly luciferase activity to Renilla luciferase activity in A549 cells (Fig 2). No significant differences were observed between 190 G and 190C alleles in both control (p=0.562) and heat-inducible (p=0.463) A549 cells.

The haplotype A-C-C was significantly lower (p=0.027) than haplotypes A-G-T, A-G-C and A-C-T in long-lived people (Table III). Haplotypes A-G-C and A-C-T had a significant 3.46- and 4.51-fold increased tendency for longevity, respectively (p=0.025 and p=0.016, respectively), when using the most common haplotype A-G-T as a statistical reference.

Table IV compares the age distributions by Hsp70 genotypes among long-lived people. Compared with 1267AA homozygotes, carriers with 1267GG genotype had a tendency to live longer (p<0.05). The same result was noted for 190GC heterozygotes in comparison with 190CC genotype carriers. As for T2437C variant, the different allele carriers (2437TT and CC) both had an increased tendency for longevity, especially for the DISCUSSION.

It is generally believed that all organisms at the cellular level respond to stress by synthesizing heat shock proteins at the expense of other proteins, and the ability of human cells to respond to heat stress decreases with aging. The possibility could not be excluded that longevity might be partly heat-stress mediated. Therefore, proteins that participate in heat-stress cascade and its regulation are potential candidates whose encoded genes may contain sequence variation contributing to the inherited tendency for longevity. We performed a candidate gene-longevity association study as well as the promoter activity assessment to explore the possible involvement of Hsp70 gene variants in susceptibility to longevity in a Xinjiang Hetian Uygur population. The Hetian city was listed as one of the four longevity districts in the world by the Institute of International Natural Medicine. This special population can offer us an interesting opportunity to establish an ideal model to decipher genetic underpinnings of natural longevity.

The amount of information gained about longevity status by putting two variants together using the MDR function was analyzed. The interaction information analysis indicated that variants G190C and T2437C had a strong synergistic effect, whereas the A1267 G variant was connected with the other by a green line, which suggests a loss of information that can be interpreted as redundancy or correlation. The pattern of high-risk (dark gray) and low-risk (light gray) genotype combinations was nonlinear across the nine two-locus genotype cells, which represented interaction as suggested by the interaction analysis.

The most noteworthy finding of this study was a positive association between the haplotype constructs of three studied variants and natural longevity in Uygur ethnicity, although no significance was observed in a single-locus analysis. Furthermore, this positive association was strengthened by interaction analysis, which suggests that G190C and T2437C variants might have an interacting effect on longevity. This is the first study to report the interactive association of Hsp70 gene variants with natural longevity in Chinese.

Since the study relating Hsp70 family variants with longevity was first reported by Altomare et al in an Italian population, many studies provide support for the involvement of Hsp70 genes in the long period of surviving. A study by Ross et al observed an increased frequency of the 2437 T allele (83.3%) of HSPA1L in an aged Irish population, which was almost equal to that (82.2%) in the current study. However, our results failed to find a significant association of 2437C allele with longevity, which was not in line with the results of Ross et al.

The MDR, which is nonparametric and genetic model-free in design, is widely believed to be an analytical data-mining method to facilitate the identification of complex genetic interactions. Moreover, this method has been successfully applied to detect and characterize gene-gene andDrosophila is caused by histone deacetylase inhibitors. J Exp Biol; : Morrow G, Samson M, Michaud S, Tanguay RM. Overexpression of the small mitochondrial Hsp extends Drosophila lifespan and increases resistance to oxidative stress. FASEB J; : Song HO, Lee W, An K, et al. C. elegans STI, the homolog of Sti/Hop, is involved in aging and stress response. J Mol Biol; : Jiang W, Qiu C, Cheng Z, et al. Correlation between haplotype of apolipoprotein B gene and natural longevity persons in Uygur nationality. Sci China C Life Sci; : W R, Wan K, Che M, et al. Analysis of heat-shock protein gene polymorphisms and the risk of Parkinson's disease. Hum Genet; : Putics A, Vegh EM, Csermely P, Soti C. Resveratrol induces the heat-shock response and protects human cells from severe heat stress. Antioxid Redox Signal; : Kletsas D, Pratsinis H, Gioni V, Pilichos K, Yiacoumettis AM, Tsagarakis S. Prior chronic in vivo glucocorticoid excess leads to an anabolic phenotype and an extension of cellular lifespan of skin fibroblasts in vitro. Ann NY Acad Sci; : Vital Statistics Governmental Department of State Statistics Bureau, ed. Annual report forms of China vital statistics. Beijing: China Statistics Publishing Company, : Altomare K, Greco V, Bellizzi D, et al. The allele (A)(-) in the promoter region of the HSP- gene is unfavorable to longevity in women. Biogerontology; : Ross OA, Curran MD, Crum KA, Rea IM, Barnett YA, Middleton D. Increased frequency of the T allele of the heat shock protein -Hom gene in an aged Irish population. Exp Gerontol; : REFERENCES Fig 2. Comparison of the promoter activity of the alleles of G190C polymorphism using HSPA1A 5-flanking 488 bp fragment. The promoter activity was examined using a luciferase reporter system in human lung carcinoma A549 cells. The data are expressed as mean 6 SD of 5 independent experiments. The blank and grid bars indicate the control and heat-inducible levels of luciferase activities expressed as percentages of the activity of G190C alleles. RLA, the ratio of firefly luciferase activity to Renilla luciferase activity. To overcome the small sample size in this study, although some underlying limitations of this method, such as computational intensiveness, indistinct interpretation, lack of sensitivity, and heterogeneity-free assumption as summarized by Manuguerra et al.24 Using MDR, we identified a strong 2-locus interaction between G190C and T2437C variants. In view of both haplotype and interaction results, we refer that the genetic framework within these 2 variants confers a predisposition to longevity in the presence of only 1 minor allele (190 G-2437C and 190C-2437 T) for these 2 variants, whereas the 2 minor allele combination (190C-2437C) is unfavorable for longevity. This might indicate the existence of interaction because the coexistent minor alleles have the opposite role with only 1 minor allele. Unfortunately, in the current study, we failed to find any significance in the promoter activity of HSPA1A for G190C alleles. It is possible that G190C variant can be considered a possible marker in linkage disequilibrium with another functionally relevant variant interacting with T2437C in affecting structure or expression of Hsp70 genes. However, because of the complexity of genetic interaction in human longevity, a decision must not be made until functional studies confirm or refute these findings. In sum, we demonstrated a strong interaction of the 3 studied variants in Hsp70 family with natural longevity in the Xinjiang Hetian Uygur population. Independent replication in other populations and subsequent functional validation are also required to confirm and inter- Singh R, Klvraa S, Bross P, et al. Heat-shock protein genes and human longevity: a view from Denmark. Ann NY Acad Sci; : Qi Y, Niu W, Zhou W, Hou S, Qiu C. Correlation between angiotensinogen gene polymorphisms and essential hypertension in Chinese population. J Hum Hypertens; : Ritchi D, Hah W, Rood, et al. Multifactor-dimensionality reduction reveals high-order interactions among estrogen-metabolism genes in sporadic breast cancer. Am J Hum Genet; : interactions in hypertension. Ann Med; : Moore JH, Gilbert JC, Tsai