www.elsevier.com/locate/mechagedev

Association between HFE mutations and longevity: a study in the Sardinian population

a, a a, b Ciriaco Carru*, Giovanni Mario Pes, Luca Deiana*, Giovannella Baggio, c,d e e e Claudio Franceschi, Domenico Lio, Carmela Rita Balistreri, Giuseppina Candore, e e Giuseppina Colonna-Romano, Calogero Caruso

a AKEA Project, Cattedra di Biochimica Clinica, Universita` di Sassari, viale S. Pietro 43/b, Sassari, Italy b AKEA Project, Unita` operativa di Medicina Generale, Azienda Ospedaliera di Padova, Padova, Italy c Istituto Nazionale di Riposo e Cura per Anziani, Ancona, Italy d AKEA Project, Dipartimento di Patologia Sperimentale, Universita` di Bologna, Bologna, Italy

Received 25 June 2002; accepted 20 December 2002

Abstract

Hereditary hemochromatosis is an HLA-linked inherited disease characterized by inappropriately high absorption of iron by the gastrointestinal mucosa. The cysteine-to-tyrosine substitution at codon 282 of the HFE encoding gene sequence is responsible for the disease, although other variants such as H63D and S65C may modify the affinity of the protein for transferrin receptors. We have recently reported that C282Y mutation is significantly increased in very old (≥90 years) Sicilian women, suggesting a role in attainment of longevity. In addition, an increase of H63D polymorphism was also observed in these women but the difference was not significant. To validate and extend these results, we investigated the distribution of these three common HFE gene mutations in Sardinian centenarians and controls. DNA samples obtained from 61 controls and 57 centenarians were typed for HFE polymorphisms using sequence-specific primers. Among the controls, none was heterozygous for the C282Y mutation, 15 were heterozygous for H63D mutation, and one for S65C. Among the centenarians, none was heterozygous for the C282Y mutation, whereas 25 were heterozygous for H63D mutation and four for the S65C mutation. No significant differences were observed in frequencies of the different alleles between young and centenarians both on the whole and when the data were analyzed according to gender. However, there was a trend for an increased frequency of H63D allele in centenarian women (24 vs. 17%, i.e., 19/80 vs. 13/78). It is noteworthy that the cumulative frequency of H63D mutations in centenarian and very old women from Sardinia and Sicily is 22 vs. 11%, i.e., 30/136 vs. 23/210, P<0.008. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that there may be a survival difference for centenarian women among carriers and non-carriers of alleles involved in iron sparing.

#2003 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Centenarians; HFE; Longevity

1. Introduction

Hereditary hemochromatosis is an HLA-linked inherited disease characterized by inappropriately high absorption of iron by the gastrointestinal mucosa. The HLA class I gene product HFE localized at 6p21.3/p22 no longer participates in immunity because it has lost its ability to bind peptides due to a definitive closure of the antigen-binding cleft. This protein, instead, has acquired the ability to form a complex with the receptor for iron-binding transferrin, thus regulating iron uptake. It indirectly regulates immune responses too because iron availability plays a role in specific and non-specific immune responses. A cysteine-to-tyrosine substitution at codon 282 of the HFE encoding gene sequence is responsible for the disease. However, other variants such as H63D and S65C may modify the affinity of the protein for transferrin receptors. The distribution of these mutations differs in different populations (Feder et al.).

2. Materials and methods

Genomic DNA samples for this study were obtained through AKEA (the name AKEA is derived from an expression in the Sardinian language that means health and life for 100 years!) study of Sardinian centenarians (Deiana et al.). At the time of the present study, DNA samples for HFE typing were available from 57 centenarians (age range from 100 to 105; 17 men and 40 women) and from 60 controls (60G.M., Carru, C., Delitala, G., A., Mariotti, S., Nieddu, A., Pettinato, S., Putzu, P., C., Baggio, G., AKEnn os. The Sardinia Study of Longevity. Aging Clin. Exp. Res., (year not provided) / Feder, J.N., Gnirke, A., Thomas, W., et al., A novel MHC I-like gene is mutated in patients with hereditary hemochromatosis. Nat. Genet., (year not provided) / Klein, J., Sato, A., The HLA system. Second of two parts. N. Engl. J. Med., (year not provided) / Lio, D., Balistreri, C.R., Colonna-Romano, G., Motta, M., Ceschi, C., Malaguarnera, M., Candore, G., Caruso, C., Association between the MHC class I gene HFE and longevity: a study in the Sicilian population. Genes Immunity (year not provided) / Lucotte, G., Frequency analysis and allele map in favor of Celtic origin of the CY mutation of hemochromatosis. Cells Mol. Dis. (year not provided) / Merryweather-Clarke, A.T., Pointon, J.J., Shearman, J.D., K.J.H., Global prevalence of putative mutations. J. Med. Genet.(year not provided) / Mura, C., Raguenes, O., Ferec, C., HFE mutations analysis in hemochromatosis probands evidence for SC implication mild form of hemochromatosis. Blood (year not provided) / Oppenheimer, S.J., Iron and its relation to immunity and infectious disease. J. Nutr., (year not provided) / A theory is also a possible explanation for the apparent discrepancy with a recent study performed in Denmark. In a C282Y mutation high-carrier frequency population such as Denmark (Lucotte 2001; Bathum et al., 2001), this mutation shows an age-related reduction in the frequency of heterozygotes for C282Y, which suggests that carrier status is associated with shorter life expectancy. The observed reduction in C282Y mutation carrier frequency persists until age 95 years; however, the frequency in the centenarian group was the same as that in the youngest group for both men and women (Bathum et al., 2001). So, in that study, heterozygosity for C282Y has a higher mortality rate in the younger groups but becomes beneficial in the oldest old. All together present and previous reports seem to strongly suggest that longevity is the result of interaction between genetic and environmental factors that, in different age, gender, and population, may result in successful or unsuccessful aging. Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to Dr. Alessandra Errigo for help in patient recruitment and blood sample processing. The AKEA Project coordinated by Professor L. Deiana was funded by grants from the Regione Autonoma della Sardegna and MIUR (ex 40% and ex 60%). The Gruppo di Studio sull'immunosenescenza coordinated by Professor C. Caruso was funded by grants from MIUR, Rome (ex 40%, to CC and DL; ex 60% to GC and GCR). The collaboration between this group and the Istituto Nazionale di Riposo e Cura per Anziani was enhanced by a cooperation contract (Longevity and elderly disability biological markers) and by the EU thematic network program ImAginE (QLK6-CT-1999-02031). References Andrews, N.C., 1999. Disorders of iron metabolism. N. Engl. J. Med. 341(26), 1986-1995. C.R., Candore, G., Almasio, P., Colonna Romano, G., Craxi, A., Motta, M., Piazza, G., Malaguarnera, M., Lio, D., Caruso, C., Analysis of HFE gene mutations in the Sicilian Population: implications for survival and longevity, Arch. Gerontol. Geriatr., (year not provided) / Shorter, E., 1982. A History of Women's Bodies. Basic Books, Inc, New York. Rendine, S., Borelli, I., Barbanti, M., Sacchi, N., Roggero, S., Curtoni, E.S., 1998. HLA polymorphisms in Italian bone marrow donors: a regional analysis. Tissue Antigens (year not provided) / Rochette, J., Pointon, J., Fisher, J., et