Mechanisms of Ageing and Development 123 (2002) 1403-1410 / www.elsevier.com/locate/mechagedev

Influences on human longevity by polymorphism (Tyrosine Hydroxylase gene): a relative risk approach

Qihua Tan, D. Bellizzi, G. Rose, S. Garasto, C. Franceschi, T. Kruse, J.W. Vaupel, G. De Benedictis, A.I. Yashin*

a Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Genetics, KKA, Odense University Hospital, Odense
b Cell Biology Department, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy
d Max-Planck Institute for Demographic Research, Doberaner Str. 114, 18057 Rostock, Germany
e Center for Demographic Studies and Sanford Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA

Received 27 February 2002; received in revised form 1 July 2002; accepted 17 July 2002

Abstract

A new method based on the recently developed relative risk approach is introduced and applied to data from Italian centenarian study (965 subjects aged from 13 to 109 years old) for investigating influences on longevity by Tyrosine Hydroxylase (TH) gene variability. The strategic parameterization enables the model to disentangle the various ways by which HUMTHO1.STR alleles (alleles 6, 7, 8, 9, 10*, 10 as defined according to the number of repeats) may contribute to reducing or increasing the hazard of death with different patterns of influence. Among all the alleles, we have found that allele 10* (10 imperfect repeats) shows a remarkable dominant and beneficial effect that reduces the log hazard of death in an additive manner. The results confirm that HUMTHO1.STR polymorphism is involved in the modulation of human longevity.

Keywords: TH gene; Relative risk; Polymorphism; Longevity

1. Introduction

Lifespan is a complex trait shaped by genetic, environmental, and stochastic factors. The genetic component has been intensively investigated by correlation studies in twins (McGue et al., 1993). Increasing evidence shows that, as in model organisms, the capability to cope with stress in humans is also a leading factor in the rate and quality of aging (Franceschi et al., 2000). Therefore, all genes involved in the complex mechanisms that control stress response are candidate genes for longevity. 

The Tyrosine Hydroxylase (TH) gene (11p15.5) encodes TH, the rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of catecholamines, amino acid-derived molecules produced by the sympathetic nervous system in response to stress. An STR marker (HUMTHO1.STR) lies inside TH intron 1 (Polymeropoulos et al., 1991), a region which is involved in RNA alternative splicing of the TH primary transcript for generating four tissue-specific types of mRNA (Kobayashi et al., 1988). Association between HUMTHO1 variability and longevity was first observed (De Benedictis et al., 1998). Thereafter, gene-environment interactions and sex-specific genetic effects have been observed when HUMTHO1 variability was analyzed by models that combine genotypic and demographic information in the estimation of genetic influence on lifespan (Tan et al., 2001b). The involvement of the 11p15.5 chromosomal region in the longevity phenotype has been confirmed by linkage disequilibrium studies carried out by analyses of two other polymorphic genes occurring in the same chromosomal region: Insulin and Insulin Growth Factor 2 (De Luca et al., 2001). However, the effects of HUMTHO1.STR allele-allele interactions on hazard of death and longevity have not been analyzed until now. The aim of the present study is to introduce an analytical method that permits disentangling the effects of HUMTHO1.STR alleles on the longevity trait. The results confirm that this polymorphism is involved in the modulation of human longevity and that allele-allele interaction plays an important role.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Samples

The data used in this study is an updated version of the data by which TH gene/longevity association was first discovered (De Benedictis et al., 1998). All individuals in the sample are unrelated, clinically healthy, and are from various socioeconomic backgrounds. For each individual, origin and residence in Italy were checked by interview as far as the grandparents' generations. All individuals gave informed consent prior to their inclusion in the study. A total of 965 subjects were collected in the new update. Among them, 210 are centenarians who were over 100 years old when a blood sampleal. (2001b), and Tan et al. (2001c).

The text has several spelling, grammatical, and formatting errors. Here's the corrected text:

The distribution of subjects according to age group, sex, and HUMTHO1.STR genotype is shown in Table 2. For each allele, the estimated initial allele frequency and the relative risks by genotype are presented. Significance levels for risk parameters (relative risks for the allele and for gene-sex interaction) were determined by testing the statistical differences between the estimated risks and 1, with the null hypothesis H:r=1. The probability of a Type I error is 0.05. 

Allele 10* is interesting in that both heterozygous and homozygous genotypes display beneficial influences that reduce the carriers' hazards of death. Corresponding relative risks are 0.920 (p-value=0.013) and 0.851 (p-value=0.005) for the heterozygous and homozygous genotypes, respectively. However, after correction for multiple comparisons, we obtain a probability of making type I error of 0.076 for the risk of allele 10* heterozygous genotype, which is borderline significant, while the risk for the 10*10* homozygous genotype remains significant (p-value=0.030). Interestingly, the relative risk of males and females is obtainable from population statistics.

The corresponding genotype frequencies at age x for the three genotypes in males are p(x)=(p2s(x)r2rgs=s(x)); p(x)=(m20;m1)(2p(1-p)s(x)r1rgs=s(x)); p(x)=(1-p)2s(x)/s(x)). In the same way, we can calculate p(x), p(x), and p(x) for females. Based on a multinomial distribution (Evans et al., 1993), the likelihood function can be written as the distribution of subjects by age group, sex, and genotype.

Table 2 presents estimated allele frequency and relative risks by genotype for each allele. Note that in Table 2, we only estimate one risk for carriers of allele 10 (non-significant) because we only observe one homozygous carrier of the allele in the sample (Table 1).

Fig. 1 plots the observed and estimated frequencies of alleles 8 and 10* carriers by age. While frequency for allele eight carriers is almost constant (Fig. 1A), the frequency of heterozygous genotypes for allele 10* is approximately the square root of the risk of the 10*10* homozygous genotype, thus suggesting a dose-effect for this allele. According to the model specification, allele 10* phenotypic value in term of log hazard of death is additive on the estimated relative risk. The frequency for 10* allele carriers climbs up as age advances (Fig. 1B), revealing obvious survival advantages for 10* allele carriers.

As for the other alleles, allele 9 seems to be recessive and detrimental because the homozygotes for this allele tend to have increased hazard of death over the ages (r=1.409 with SE=0.178, P=0.022). However, such a risk value becomes non-significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons.

Lastly, as for gene-sex interaction, we see from Table 2 that alleles 6 and 8 seem to decrease and allele 10* to increase the risks of death in males. However, also in this case, the P values become non-significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons.

Given the complexity of the longevity trait, a demanding issue is to develop new models that are capable of capturing the various gene trajectories relating to the trait which occur as the population ages and survival selection operates. The present study could serve as a hint in this direction because it introduces an analytical method that permits revealing the interaction between the alleles of a gene (TH) associated with human longevity. The method is applied to a large dataset so that subtle effects of the gene variant on the complex trait could be revealed.

The basic statistical model described in this paper has been introduced in recent publications (Yashin et al., 1998, 1999b, 2000; Tan et al., 2001b,c). However, the parameterization in the present application shows the feasibility of detecting an allele-allele interaction (see Table 2 and Fig. 1) which implies dominant and additive beneficial effects on the risk of death (allele 10*). An important feature of this application is the combination of individual genetic data with population demographic information in determining the relative risks of the observed genes. The baseline hazard function in this approach is estimated non-parametrically so that no specific survival distribution is imposed on the likelihood function (Tan et al., 200Al. (2001b). However, it can be seen from this study that the proportional hazard assumption is implicated in human longevity, and in an allele-specific way. How could these effects be explained from a biological point of view? TH encodes the rate-limiting enzyme for the synthesis of catecholamines, amino acid-derived molecules that act both as hormones (adrenaline) and neurotransmitters (dopamine and noradrenaline). The TH gene is therefore a master gene in the neuroendocrine system (NES). Vertebrates have developed a complex hierarchy of multi-organ NES, integrated with the immune system to form the immune-NES. This system governs the capability to cope with a variety of stress factors and, consequently, rate and quality of aging (Franceschi et al., 2000). The HUMTHO1 microsatellite acts, in vitro, as a transcription regulatory element showing a silencing effect which correlates with the number of repeats (Meloni et al., 2001). In particular, the inhibition is proportional to the number of repeats up to allele 8, while by increasing the number of repeats up to 10, no further inhibitory effect is observed but rather a relative enhancement depending on the cell lines used (Albanese et al., 2001). These findings support the idea that HUMTHO1 microsatellite regulates TH transcription in an allelic-specific way and modulates the activity of the TH gene acting as a quantitative genomic effector. These allele-specific effects would explain the dominant and dose-dependent beneficial effects we observed for allele 10 by our approach. This effect is not found for allele 10*, likely because of its low frequency with respect to the sample size. On the other hand, a large amount of data suggests the importance of an efficient production of catecholamines in healthy aging and longevity. Indeed, there are now numerous studies demonstrating that sympathetic factors play a central role not only in cardiovascular homeostatic control but also in the pathogenesis and/or in the progression of several cardiovascular diseases, such as essential hypertension (Rahn et al., 1999) and myocardial infarction (Bertel et al., 1982). Therefore, good efficiency in TH gene transcription may be a key for an appropriate response towards stochastic and age-related stress factors, and consequently for longevity. 

References 
Albanese, V., Faucon Biguet, N., Klefer, H., Bayard, E., Mallet, J., Meloni, R., Polymeropoulos, M.H., Xiao, H., Rath, D.S., Merrill, C.R. (2001). Quantitative effects on gene silencing by allelic variation at a tetranucleotide microsatellite. Hum. Mol. Genet., 10(17), 1785-1792.

Bertel, O., Buhler, F.R., Baitsch, G., Ritz, R., Burkart, F. (1982). Plasma adrenaline and noradrenaline in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Relationship to ventricular arrhythmias of varying severity. Chest, 81(5), 607-613.

Franceschi, C., Valensin, S., Bonafe`, M., Paolisso, G., Yashin, A.I., Monti, D., De Benedictis, G. (2000). The network and remodeling theories of aging: historical background and new perspectives. Exp. Gerontol., 35(6-7), 879-896.

Meloni, R., Albanese, V., Ravassard, P., Treilhou, F., Mallet J. (2001). A tetranucleotide polymorphic microsatellite, located in the first intron of the tyrosine hydroxylase gene, acts as a transcription regulatory element in vitro. Hum. Mol. Genet., 10(17), 1785-1792.

Rahn, K.H., Barenbrock, M., Hausberg, M. (1999). The sympathetic nervous system in the pathogenesis of hypertension. J. Hypertens., 17(Suppl. 5), S11-S14.