Experimental Gerontology
www.elsevier.com/locate/expgero

The intron interferon-gamma gene and group po Italian Mt CETTee TEE UIstituto | EE MEPIS Nazionale > di] MP EEi Ricovero re Cura dell'Anziano, EMA GEE_ Ancona, | ee ENA EEA, Italy

Received, June 7 .//,0; received in lint 1 revised form ./ September .//,0; accepted 7 .1 September 4 .//

Abstract

SABA Oe cardiovascular diseases, LILLIES, neurodegeneration, ONE J OED NN, osteoarthritis < s and osteoporosis, and diabetes. Thus, it is hypothesized that genetic variations in pro-EN ENON SE:r anti-inflammatory cytokines might influence successful ageing and longevity. 75 NN IE have Jr> studied the distribution of +874T - ae ren> Ai interferon-gamma in a large number of Italian BNE ON ED1 centenarians to evaluate if the two alleles might be differently represented in people selected for longevity. I ee Oe.DNAs samples Were obtained from 11741 Italian centenarians (8;; cae) years old (NEE DT women and men); and from 248 PN BNI NENT 0 OA/ <60-year-old oe NEN OT control beesubjects (8;/ women and men) matched for geographical distribution. EM LEO IEEPolymorphisms at +874 were identified using an amplification refractory mutation FINESsystem EEE eeemethodology. The +874T z allele was found less frequently in centenarian women than in centenarian men and control women whereas significant differences were observed in the distribution of the two alleles between male or female. Allele frequencies in centenarian women were not found significantly different from male controls. Possession of the +874A allele, known to be associated with low IFN-y production, significantly increases the possibility to achieve extended longevity, suggesting that the pro-inflammatory status characteristic of ageing may be detrimental for successful ageing. The datum that the oore allele was significantly increased in female but not in male centenarians strengthens the idea that gender may be a major variable in the biology of ageing. However, the data add another piece of evidence to the complex puzzle of genetic and environmental factors involved in controlling human life span expectancy. Thus, studies on cytokine gene polymorphisms may promise to individuate a complex network of trans-interactive genes able to influence the type and strength of responses to environmental stressors and as a final result, thereby conditioning individual life expectancy. //. Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Interferon-gamma; Longevity; Inflammation; Centenarians; Immunogenetics

Introduction

Human longevity seems to be directly correlated with optimal functioning of the immune system. It has been reported that the aa repeat microsatellite allele at the first intron of the IFN-y gene is associated with higher levels of in vitro cytokine production (Pravica et al., 1999). More recently, the group has reported an absolute correlation between the CP repeat allele and the presence of the allele at +874 position from the translation start site coinciding with a putative binding site that may be important in the induction of constitutively high IFN-y production (Pravica et al., 1999). 75 NN IE have studied the distribution of +874T - interferon-gamma polymorphisms in a large number of Italian centenarians to evaluate if the two alleles might be differently represented in people selected for longevity. DNAs samples were obtained from 11741 Italian centenarians (8;; cae) years old (DT women and men); and from 248 PN BNI NENT 0 OA/ <60-year-old control subjects (8;/ women and men) matched for geographical distribution. Polymorphisms at +874 were identified using an amplification refractory mutation system methodology. The +874T allele was found less frequently in centenarian women than in centenarian men and control women whereas significant differences were observed in the distribution of the two alleles between males and females. Allele frequencies in centenarian women were not found to be significantly different from male controls. Possession of the +874A allele, known to be associated with low IFN-y production, significantly increases the possibility to achieve extended longevity, suggesting that the pro-inflammatory status characteristic of ageing may be detrimental for successful ageing. The data that the oore allele was significantly increased in female but not in male centenarians strengthens the idea that gender may be a major variable in the biology of ageing. However, the data add another piece of evidence to the complex puzzle of genetic and environmental factors involved in controlling human life span expectancy. Studies on cytokine gene polymorphisms mayCytokines, such as Interferon, are essential for immune system responses and protection from susceptibility to various diseases. Cytokine genes contain single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or microsatellites in their promoter regions. These changes can have a significant impact on transcription by altering the structure of transcription factor binding sites within gene promoters or enhancers and silencers within introns or more remote sites. It has been hypothesized that these polymorphisms may confer flexibility in the immune response, allowing differential production of cytokines. Cytokine gene polymorphisms have been shown to be involved in susceptibility, severity, and clinical outcome of several diseases. In this study, DNA samples were collected from Italian centenarians and controls matched for geographical origin. The amplified products were monitored by electrophoresis on an agarose gel containing ethidium bromide. The production of Interferon is essential for defense against viruses and intracellular pathogens and in the induction of immune-mediated inflammation and amplification refractory mutation system. Differences were observed in the distribution of two alleles between male and female controls, but no significant difference was observed in the distribution of alleles between centenarian men and male controls. Allele frequencies in centenarian women were significantly different from control women.Peonatural killer 89N: ain't cells play an important role in bringing about the acute inflammatory response. During the subsequent antigen-specific phase of the immune response, IFN-y acts as a regulator of antigen presentation, proliferation, and differentiation of lymphocyte populations. High-level production of IFN-y during this phase of host defence is now classically seen as a hallmark of type I reaction, characterized by activation of macrophages and strong cellular inflammatory reactions (Billiau et al., ,;;(13):5  1$1 Statistical analysis, gene count, and tables were constructed to determine statistical significance (with Yates correction) of differences in allele frequency for the IFN-y in centenarians and controls. 

3.1 Results
Awad et al. ,;;;:(30) described variable length repeat sequence in the first intron of the human IFN-y gene and showed that allele M is associated with a high in vitro IFN-y production. In a consecutive study, allele 7 M was found to be associated with allograft fibrosis in lung transplant patients, confirming its role as a marker of high IFN-y production. In a further study (Pravica et al., 7 .///:(30)), the end 2AM5/-flanking region in the first intron of the human IFN-y gene was described, showing an absolute correlation between the presence of allele 7 and the presence of the high-producing microsatellite allele M. This polymorphism +874T allowed assessment of conformation with the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for allele distribution both in centenarian and control population samples, and no significant differences were observed in frequencies of either allele between the two groups of subjects (Table 5). In addition, the frequency of the +874T allele was comparable to that of the so-called allele M (Goris et al., ,;;;:5). When the analysis was performed according to gender, the +874T allele was found less frequently in women (Lio et al. 7). 

Experimental Gerontology - $5 might not allow the identification of significant differences, these data seem to suggest that the genetic component of the longevity achievement may be important for women too. However, it has to be remembered that the expression of the IFN-y gene may be subject to direct hormonal control. In a transient expression assay, the steroid 17B-estradiol was shown to markedly increase the activity of the IFN- promoter in lymphoid cells that expressed the appropriate hormone receptor. This effect is mediated by sequences in the 2AM5/-flanking region of the gene. Hormonal regulation of this pleiotropic cytokine has been suggested to account in part for the ability of estrogens to potentiate many types of immune responses and for the disproportionate susceptibility of women to immune-inflammatory diseases (Verthelyi and Klinman, .///:5). Thus, it has to be taken into account that gene variants representing genetic advantage for one gender might not automatically be relevant for the other gender in terms of successful or unsuccessful ageing. 

The polymorphism might have functional consequences for transcription of the human IFN-y gene. Therefore, the polymorphism might directly influence the level of IFN-y production associated with the microsatellite marker (Pravica et al., .///:5). The activity reflected increased circulating levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and acute phase proteins (Franceschi et al., .///(24)0; Bruunsgaard et al., .//,:5). Systemic consequences include a pattern of changes attributed to chronic inflammatory diseases or frailty (Ershler and Keller, .///:5). Epidemiological studies suggest that chronic low-grade inflammation in ageing promotes an atherogenic profile and is related to age-associated inflammatory diseases and enhanced mortality risk (Harris et al., .;;;0; Bruunsgaard et al., .//,:5). 

Accordingly, polymorphic alleles of inflammatory cytokines, determining changes in cytokine production, play an important role in age-related inflammatory diseases and unsuccessful ageing (Grimaldi et al., .///0; Hobson and Ralston, .//,0; McCusker et al., .//,:5). Moreover, it has been recently reported thatThe magnitude of the spontaneous release of interferon-y (IFN-y) and tumor necrosis factor-a from cells is negatively correlated with the decrease of the cognitive function score of Alzheimer's disease patients (Solerte et al., 2000). This provides evidence that the complex puzzle of genetic and environmental factors involved in the control of life span expectancy in humans may be influenced by cytokine gene polymorphisms, which can help individuate a network of trans-interactive genes capable of influencing the type and strength of responses to environmental stressors, ultimately conditioning individual life expectancy. Subjects with a pro-inflammatory profile have a negative outcome, making it sensible that possession of the +874A allele, known to be associated with low IFN-y production, is significantly increased in centenarians with a pro-inflammatory status (Candore et al., 2002). These data strengthen the suggestion that pro-inflammatory status characteristics of ageing may be detrimental for successful ageing, and concomitantly suggest that tight control of the inflammatory status may contribute to survival of extreme ages. 

Several findings point out that gender is a major variable in the genetics of longevity and suggest the working hypothesis that men rely more upon genetics than women in order to attain longevity (Franceschi et al., 2000). The present data indicate instead that the +874 IFN-y allele distribution is different in centenarian women with respect to controls, but not in centenarian men. 

Acknowledgements: ST, Rome; MP, Immunogenetics of Longevity; SN, coordinated by Prof. A. Caruso; and VN from the Ministry of Health and Projects Immunological parameters related to age and Pharmacogenomics of Alzheimer's Disease, from the Sicilian government Breast Cancer and Immune Response. This work was also performed under the aegis of an EU programme called ImAginE. 

References: 
Candore G et al., 2002. Immunogenetics, 54: 734-738. 
Franceschi C et al., 2000. Aging Clin Exp Res, 12: 77-84.The original text appears to be a mix of scientific terms and phrases that are not well-structured or formatted, making it difficult to understand the intended meaning. Here's the processed text with corrections:

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) gene: deep sequencing reveals an absolute negative correlation with laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. Microsatellite markers are indicative of high IFN-gamma gene expression. Production of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha from natural killer (NK) cells is associated with abnormal NK cell reactivity and cognitive impairment in Alzheimer's disease. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. Genetic polymorphism in the first intron of the human IFN-gamma gene is associated with lung allograft fibrosis. Immunology News.

Immunomodulatory properties of interferon-gamma. The immunology of exceptional individuals: lessons from centenarians. Inflamm-aging: an evolutionary perspective on immunosenescence. Aging and pro-inflammatory cytokines: a current opinion on hematological diseases.

Estrogen regulates the IFN-gamma promoter. The immunogenetics of longevity is relevant to the histocompatibility complex polymorphism and control of human longevity.

Age-associated increased interleukin gene expression, late-life diseases, and frailty are regulated by estrogen. Immunology Today.

HLA, aging, and longevity: a critical reappraisal. Immunogenetics of longevity: data review from literature.

It appears that the original text has been fragmented or truncated in some places, resulting in incomplete sentences or unclear phrases. However, I have made my best attempt to correct any errors and improve readability while preserving the original meaning as much as possible.