8 EEEEwww.elsevier.nl/locate/expgero - Longevity, the Aging Population, and Blood Transfusing: Building, OE_ Belfast, t NII, BT9, )7TS. Received % July 4 ((() ; received i lint 1 revised | form < * | January < ((+) ; accepted 7 , | February. The mtDNA genome has been implicated as playing a pivotal role in determining the longevity and lifespan of the human population. A methodology was used to identify polymorphic restriction enzyme sites within a 3-4 bp region of the mtDNA genome, and a table of genetic haplotypes for healthy aged and younger control cohorts of patients was constructed. Forty-six different mtDNA haplotypes were identified across the two age groups but statistical analysis failed to show any significant associations. The European haplogroup was previously reported to be associated with longevity but it was not found to have increased frequency within the aged population. However, haplotypes comprising the haplogroup could be differentiated into two distinct branches by presence or absence of two polymorphic restriction sites (+34; +3((()))). The branch defined by +34 displayed a significant increased frequency in the aged samples compared to controls while the branch defined by 16000g displayed a significant decreased frequency in aged samples compared to controls. The polymorphism associated with longevity in Japanese was not found in the Irish population, while the polymorphism associated with successful ageing in French centenarians was found to have an increased frequency in the aged population compared to younger control group but failed to reach a level of statistical significance. Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Mitochondrial DNA; Longevity; Haplogroup; Polymorphism.
Corresponding author: Northern Ireland Regional Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Belfast City Hospital, Blood Transfusing Building, Belfast NIE $. Tel.: - (0)28-40304:0:4. E-mail address: martin.curran@bll.n-i.nhs.uk (M.D. Curran).
Introduction process (Papa and Skulachev, +;;,), Brierley et al., +;;,, ErLee and Wei, +;;,, Miquel, +;;:, Brand, Kowald and Kirkwood, (((), Meloy, (((), Rustin et al., (((>). Oxygen free radicals, usually referred to as reactive oxygen species are the major source of oxidative damage within the cell and lie at the heart of one of the most prominent and plausible theories postulated, the free radical theory of ageing (Beckman and Ames, +;;:, Cadenas and Davies, (((), Owen; Sastre et al., 7(((>). The main source of FROS within the cell is the aerobic metabolic pathway located within the mitochondrion. The ROS produced cause cumulative damage to cellular constituents - DNA, RNA, proteins and lipids - that is believed to result in ageing and eventual death. The mitochondrial DNA genome (mtDNA) is a closed circular double-stranded genome of +3%3; bp that encodes for tRNAs, polypeptides and is estimated to undergo mutations at least 3 times faster than nuclear DNA (aDNA). There are at least two factors implicated in promoting this high rate of mutation: (1) there are no histone proteins to protect mtDNA and (2) there is only a very inefficient repair mechanism against damaged DNA. DNA is located in an area termed the control region. The control region is the variable region of the human mtDNA genome and is the location of "the loop" (D-loop). The number of features exhibited by mtDNA (polymorphic maternal mode of inheritance, lack of recombination, and relatively small genome) led to its analysis by molecular approaches being widely exploited in anthropological studies, providing clearer insight into human evolution, origins, and patterns of migration (Torroni et al., +;;).Pengman et al. have established that numerous mtDNA variants/haplotypes, defined by a restriction enzyme that exists within the European Caucasian population, can be differentiated into nine mtDNA haplogroups: I, E, D, G, J, and others, based on polymorphisms associated with longevity in humans. De Benedictis and colleagues reported a statistically significant increase in the frequency of the broad haplogroup, including subgroups I, J, and T, among male centenarians from the Avon North region of Italy compared to younger males from the same region. Two other independent studies identified increases in the frequencies of mitochondrial polymorphisms at position 12395 in Japanese centenarians and in French centenarians. Successful aging was assessed in this study. For analysis, a 344 bp section of the mtDNA was targeted and subjected to high-density restriction enzyme analysis as outlined previously (Torroni et al., 1993). This region of mtDNA was selected for a number of reasons. Firstly, it contained part of our cohort of control and aged cases and permitted the construction of a table of genetic haplotypes incorporating various polymorphic restriction sites encountered when bands deviated from the predicted patterns inferred from the Anderson sequence (Anderson et al., 1981). Secondly, it contains the polymorphic restriction site which defines the European haplogroup and would therefore allow us to determine whether this haplogroup is also increased in our aged Irish population. Thirdly, the absence of recombination with respect to the mtDNA infers that any other ancestral polymorphism outside of the region analyzed and possibly involved in aging would be tightly linked to one or more of the various haplotypes/groups created for this region and contribute indirectly to the overall analysis. In addition to this analysis, the frequency of mitochondrial nucleotide polymorphisms at positions 12395 and 10398 were examined in our control and aged populations in an attempt to verify the previous findings of significant associations and to establish whether these polymorphisms are also significantly increased in the aged community. Subjects were chosen at random from the DNA bank of normal healthy Caucasian individuals from the Northern Ireland population stored at the Northern Ireland Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics Laboratory of Belfast City Hospital. The study involved 47 aged consecutive samples (23 female, 24 male, with an age-range of 70-98 years old) from the Belfast Elderly Longitudinal Free-living Ageing Study. All samples were healthy Caucasian individuals from the Northern Ireland population displaying no signs of age-related disorders, still living independently and approximately 77 years old on average (Ligthart et al., 2014). In the case of the polymorphism study, DNA samples were derived from a cohort of unrelated Asian individuals (Singapore Chinese, age-range 20-80 years old) accessed from the DNA archival bank at NUS and also used to provide positive and negative controls for this particular polymorphism and therefore verify our sequence-specific probe results. PCR amplification of mtDNA region spanning nucleotides 4378-403 was essentially those described by Torroni et al. but extended to improve the specificity and sensitivity of the selected region of the mtDNA.Psincluded 1; the BONE, JOD entire Sytb y and ay NS ND6 genes, Karen Small Ape and a section of the NDS oegene were used to identify the exact Ce ONt nucleotide variation causing the presence or absence of polymorphic restriction sites. Amplification primers for the mtDNA region D-loop were used to sequence the genome according to the published sequence from Anderson et al. Cing primers were used for polymorphisms encountered in this study. Successful amplification was confirmed using gel electrophoresis on a Neagarose gel stained with methidium bromide. After successful amplification, each product was subjected to Hinfl, Hpal, Mbol, Rsal, BamHI, and Haell restriction enzymes. Purified products were sequenced using appropriate sequencing primers shown in Table. Statistical analysis was performed using Fisher's exact probability tests to assess frequency differences between aged and control groups for haplotypes, groups of related haplotypes, and polymorphisms. Multiple comparisons were taken into account by employing Bonferroni's correction. Phylogenetic analysis was also conducted.The mtDNA was analyzed using maximum parsimony criteria. This was performed using the eycluster of programs in the PHYLIP package and the Wagner method. First, the restriction matrix was bootstrapped using the seqboot program. Maximum parsimony trees were generated from this data using the default option in the mix program. Finally, a consensus tree was obtained using the CONSENSE program. The DNA samples were amplified using specifically designed primers for two regions of interest, and amplification for each region was performed again with modified cycling conditions. Amplification was verified by agarose gel electrophoresis stained with ethidium bromide. Amplified DNA was then applied to a charged nylon membrane for hybridization and stringent washes, followed by detection of the hybridized DIG-labeled probes using chemiluminescence. Forty-six mtDNA haplotypes were identified, including five novel restriction sites. The total number of different genetic haplotypes identified on the basis of presence or absence of each of the four restriction sites was 33. Eleven of these haplotypes were unique to the cohort of samples, and 20 were unique to the aged sample group. However, no significant differences were found between male and female or control and aged sample groups. These results are hardly surprising given the very high number of variables with respect to haplotypes and low frequencies of majority haplotypes. The polymorphic nucleotide positions are italicized in Table 4.Sorry, but the text is unreadable and contains many errors. Please provide a readable version of the text for me to proofread and improve.A decrease was observed in the MMRONSOMfeADS frequencies of the haplotypes found in both the male and female groups in the control and aged JPN samples. The haplotypes were bootstrapped, and maximum parsimony trees were generated using the IELTSf programs in the Mee package (Version - 4.0). The eleven EM1 groups of related haplotypes formed are indicated by the branches of each Grp, and the haplogroup is highlighted by the square bracket. The same control and aged cohort of samples were examined for the two mtDNA nucleotide polymorphisms at positions 16519 and 12308 associated with longevity. In the case of the 16519 polymorphism, all individuals from the Irish population tested negative for this polymorphism. Individuals tested positive for the 12308 sequence using the RNA Mito+ specific probe. A cohort of Singaporean Chinese DNA samples was examined under the same conditions, and the 16519 polymorphism was observed in six samples, while no heteroplasmy was apparent. Although these results reflect those observed in the French study, no significant association was observed when statistical analysis was performed using Fisher's exact probability test. However, a more marked increase in the 16519 polymorphism was observed in females compared to males. Mitochondrial mutations caused by ROS-induced mtDNA mutations are a major contributor to cellular deterioration underlying the aging process. The possibility that certain inherited mtDNA polymorphisms may predispose certain individuals to be more resistant to age-related diseases and promote longevity is an attractive concept supported by recent studies in French, Japanese, and Italian centenarians. In this study, we assessed...Eg, there is a poly-A nucleotide polymorphism in the mtDNA region of 343 bp in the genome. This is found in the Irish aged population and compared to a younger control group. A total of 53 distinct genetic haplotypes were created within the Irish population. This high level of diversity was somewhat surprising, considering the relatively homogenous nature of the Irish community. It is interesting to note that some of these haplotypes were not present in both age groups, and a higher number was found in the aged samples compared to the control samples, indicating a slight increase in mtDNA variation with age. Considering the high number of variables (53 haplotypes) and their low frequencies in most cases, homogeneity was yet tallied. Experimental Gerontology groups failed to identify any significant associations. Phylogenetic analysis, however, identified two groups of related haplotypes encompassing all 53 haplotypes. Of these eleven groups, three displayed notable frequency differences between the two age groups. Through phylogenetic analysis, two distinct branches were shown to form the haplogroup: the first branch defined by the presence of the restriction site +34 and displays increased frequency in aged samples while the second branch defined by the absence of this site has decreased frequency in aged samples. Even after adjusting for significance using Bonferroni's correction, these frequency differences remained significant. In an Italian study, they tested for the defining restriction site of +33 for the haplogroup and it is therefore not possible to ascertain which branch their individuals assigned to predominantly belonged. The African haplogroup subgroup defined by this mutation was observed at a frequency of 1% in the Irish population examined but was restricted to the first branch of the haplogroup. Interestingly, this haplogroup has also been reported in the Italian population.(Quintana-Murci et al., 2004) stated that the frequency of the A12308G mutation, which is present in the haplogroup J, is considerably higher than that reported here for the OID population. Given the significance attributed to the J haplogroup in longevity, it would be of great interest to re-examine the individuals used in the study by De Benedictis et al. and establish whether they have this mutation. The importance of the overlap between the two mutations defining the haplogroup J (Tanaka et al., 2003) reported in mtDNA polymorphism at nucleotide position 12308 to be at a significantly increased frequency within a sample of Japanese centenarians compared to a control group aged 63 years old. The frequency was reported at 3% in centenarians and 0.4% in the control samples. This polymorphism was not observed in any of the samples of the Irish population examined here but was observed at a frequency of 1.5% in a cohort of Asian samples included in this study. The Irish population is a relatively closed population and therefore does not display the genotypical diversity that is expressed globally. This polymorphism is linked to the Asian haplogroup J and results in the absence of an Alu restriction site and has not yet been reported in the European population (Torroni et al., 1994). It is therefore understandable that this polymorphism associated with the Japanese population is not found within the Irish examined. It has been postulated that A12308G genotype decelerates the accumulation of mtDNA mutations in somatic cells with advancing age (Tanaka et al., 2003). It is further postulated that this genotype is likely to confer resistance to adult-onset diseases by suppressing obesity and atherosclerosis. The frequency of this polymorphism within the Japanese younger population may be relevant to the fact that life expectancy in Japan is one of the highest in the world. It would be of interest to investigate the frequency of this polymorphism in other Oriental populations with lower life expectancies. Our data, however, rules out a role for this polymorphism in successful ageing in the Irish Caucasian population. The A12308G polymorphism was observed at a frequency of 4% in the French study of centenarians and was at 3% in a control group of 78 adults (Ivanova et al., 1998). In this study, the polymorphism was observed to have a frequency of 2.5% in the control group samples and 1% in the aged group samples. These results would suggest that the polymorphic nucleotide may be associated with successful ageing but is not a major factor in the ageing process and would therefore not be a good predictive marker for successful ageing. It should be noted that no strong correlation between this polymorphism and any of the groups of related haplotypes displaying frequency differences between the two age groups was observed. Of the eight positive samples for this polymorphism, seven occurred in haplogroup J (containing all five control cases) and one occurred in haplogroup K (in sample <(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:15),>(cid:28) in centenarians), indicating that the specific genetic background can affect longevity, possibly by conferring increased resistance to the accumulation of mtDNA mutations with age. Similarly, it is important to point out that any specific nucleotide or haplogroup defining a polymorphism associated with ageing may not be directly involved but simply act as a marker for other tightly linked polymorphisms occurring elsewhere in the mtDNA genome that directly affect longevity. Certainly, if the significant association of the J haplogroup with ageing is confirmed in the exact nucleotide sequence, differences responsible, and determine their functional impact on the ageing process. Our findings ofWane Peef age-associated 1 mtDNA variants in the Irish population. Certain theory suggests that the NEE-mitochondrial genome may play a subtle role in the aging process and therefore requires more focused gerontological research attention. Anderson, Bankier, Barrell, B.G., De Bruijn, Coulson, AR., Drouin, J, Eperon, LC DP., Roe, B.A., Sanger, F., Schreier, PHL, DE ANE Smith, AS. Staden, R., and Young, IG. Sequence organization of the human mitochondrial genome. Nature; 1981 Jun 18; 290(5806):457-65. Eckman, KB., and Ames, BN. The free radical theory of aging matures. Physiol. Rev., 1989 Jul;69(3):547-81. Biagini, GI, Pallotti, FF., Carraro, SS., Sgarbi, GI , Pich, MM., Yu EEE Lenaz et al. Mitochondrial DNA in platelets from subjects: Mech. Ageing Dev.; 1994 Aug 15;75(2):109-19. Brand NEE Eee. Uncoupling to survive? The role of mitochondrial inefficiency in aging. Gerontol.; 1995;41 Suppl 2:126-30. Brierley EJ, Johnson MA, James OFW., Turnbull DM. Mitochondrial involvement in the BMEDA0 process. Mol Cell Biochem.; 1997 Nov;174(1-2):191-3. Brierley EJ., Johnson MA , Lightowlers RN., James OFW., Turnbull DM. Role of mitochondrial DNA mutations in human aging: implications for the central nervous system and muscle. Ann Neurol.; 1998 Dec;44(6):908-10. Cadenas J, Davies KJA. Mitochondrial free radical generation, oxidative stress, and aging. Free Radic Biol Med.; 2000 Feb 1;29(3-4):222-30. Chen YS, Torroni A, Excoffier L, Santachiara-Benerecetti AS., Wallace DC. Analysis of variation in African populations reveals the most ancient of all human continent-specific mtDNA haplogroups. Am J Hum Genet.; 1995 Apr;56(4):823-33. Cottrell DA., Blakely EL., Borthwick GM., Johnson MA, Taylor GA., Brierley EJ., Ince DM. Role of mitochondrial DNA mutations in disease eye and Ann Acad Sci.; 1999 Apr 15;893:302-8. Curran MD., Williams F., Earle JAP., Rima BK., van Dam MG., Bunce M., Middleton D. Range of amplification as an alternative strategy for characterizing novel alleles. Eur J Hum Genet.; 1996 Sep-Oct;4(5):271-7. De Benedictis G., Carrieri G., Varcasia OME, Bonafe D, Franceschi. Inherited variability of the mitochondrial genome and successful aging in humans. Ann Acad Sci.; 1998 Nov 20;854:59-72. De EEE ELIE-Benedictis G, Rose GG, Carrieri G, De Luca M., Falcone E, Passarino G, Bonafe D, Monti Baggio G, Bertolini MARI_D, Mattace IR et al. Mitochondrial DNA inherited are associated with successful longevity in humans?; 2001 Oct;12(8):515-28. Felstenstein JJ. Phylogenetic inference package). c. I . Department c t of Genetics, University / of Washington, POR OME, Seattle, WA. Ingman, M., Kaessmann H., Paabo S., Gyllensten. Mitochondrial genome variation and the origin of modern humans. Nature; 2000 May 18;405(6788):907-13. Ivanova L., Lepage V., Charron D., Schachter F. Mitochondrial genotype associated with Caucasian Pes centenarians. Gerontology; 1998;44(6):349-51. Kopsidas G., Kovalenko SA, INI DO, Heffernan I, Yarovaya, Kramarova, Stojanoveki, Borg J foe M., Caragounis A., Linnane AW., Aeemene Tissue OTs A Nee Oe mitochondrial DNA changes. Ann Acad Sci.; 1998 Nov 20;854:118-27. Kowald A., Kirkwood TB. Accumulation of defective mitochondria through delayed degradation of damaged organelles and its possible role in the aging of post-mitotic and dividing cellsOxidative damage elicited by an imbalance of free radical scavenging enzymes is associated with large-scale mtDNA deletions in aging, e.g., human skin. Mutat. I. Mitochondrial oxidative stress and potential physiological consequences in aging. Ann. Acad. Sci. Michikawa, Y., Mazzucchelli, F.E., Bresolin, N., Scarlato, G., Attardi, G. Aging-dependent accumulation of point mutations in the human mtDNA control region for replication. Nr. Science: Middleton, D.R., Williams, Cullen, P., Mallon, I.E., and ANE ENE ENE. Modification of an HLA typing system leading to improved allele determination. Tissue Antigens - Miquel, J. An update on the oxygen mutation theory of aging: genetic and evolutionary implications. Mech Ageing Dev: REIN IOISIE. Gerontol.: Papa, L., and Kulachev, N.M. Reactive oxygen species, mitochondria and aging. Mol Cell Pets Mies SS Biochem.: Quintana-Murci, L., Semino, O., Bandelt, H.J., Passarino, G., McElreavey, K., and Santachiara-Benerecetti, A.S. Genetic evidence of an early exit of Homo sapiens from Africa through eastern Africa. Nature Genet.: Rea, M.M., Master, W.S.V., Woodside, S.V., Young, L.S., Archbold, G.P., Linton, E.A., Lennox, B., Multey, J.H., Harmon, D.L., and Whitehead AS. Community-living nonagenarians in Northern Ireland have lower plasma homocysteine but similar methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase-thermolabile genotype prevalence compared to subjects. Atherosclerosis: Austin, A.I., von Kleist-Retzow, J.C., He Vajo, Z., Rotig, A., Munnich, A. For debate: defective mitochondria, free radicals, cell death, we get VON?, aging-reality or myth-ochondria? Mech Ageing Dev: Sastre, J.J., Pallardo, F.V., Del la Asuncion, J., Vina, J., and EAE. Mitochondria, oxidative stress and aging. Free Rad. Res.: Tanaka, M., Gong, J.S., Zhang, Y.Z., Yamada, Y., Borgeld, H.J., Yagi, K. Mitochondrial genotype associated with longevity and its inhibitory effect on mutagenesis. Mech Ageing Dev: Tanaka, M., Gong, J.S., Zhang, Y.Z., Yamada, Y., Borgeld, H.J., Yagi, K., and Oe Aa ae ERE. Mitochondrial genotype associated with longevity. Lancet: Orroni, W., Huoponen, K.I., Francalacci, P., Petrozzi, M., Morrelli, L., Scozzari, R., Obinu I., Savantaus W., Wallace D.C. Classification of European mtDNA from an analysis of three European populations. Genetics: Torroni, A., Lott M.T., Cabell M.F., Chen Y.S., Lavergne L. Wallace D.C. mtDNA and the origin of Caucasians identification of ancient Caucasian-specific haplotypes one of which is prone to recurrent somatic duplication in the D-loop region. Am. J Hum Genet.: Torroni A., Lott M.T., Chen Y.Szathmary E.J.Williams R.C.Schanfield M.S.Troup G.A.Knowler W.C.Lawrence D.N.Weiss K.M.SOD Daeg Wallace D.C. Native American mitochondrial DNA analysis indicates that the Amerind and the Nadene populations were founded by two independent migrations. Genetics: Williams, C.-Y., Lee, 9-0, Fahn, 9-0-30, Wei, and Oxidative damage elicited by an imbalance of free radical scavenging enzymes is associated with large-scale mtDNA deletions in aging, e.g., human skin. Mutat. I. Allele resolution of oligonucleotide probes originating late two-stage typing. Tissue Antigens.