Experimental Gerontology 36 (2001) 1303-1315 <www.elsevier.com/locate/expgero> exhibits sex-dependent influence on human longevity. Department of Thrombosis, Research, University of Southern Denmark and Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Ribe County Hospital, Esbjerg, Denmark, Epidemiology, Institute of Public Health, and Aging Research Center, University of Southern Denmark-Odense University, Denmark. Received January 4 -../0; received revised form March % -../0; accepted March * -../ with cardiovascular disease and longevity in the Danish population. A new procedure that combines both demographic and individual genetic information in determining the relative observed genetic variations is applied. The sex-dependent influences can be found by introducing sex-specific population survival and incorporating the gene-sex interaction. Three genetic polymorphisms, angiotensinogen "6(cid:26)-,7(cid:27), blood coagulation factor VII 89(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:29): (6(cid:25),7), and FVII- ,(cid:4)(cid:7)(cid:8)/.(cid:27), manifest significant influences on survival in males with reduced hazards of death for carriers of the angiotensinogen "-,7) allele, the 9 7 VII (6(cid:25),7) allele, and the J 9(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:29)(cid:20),-,&/.) allele. The results show that some of these genotypes associated with lower risk of death could also reduce the carriers' death rate and contribute to increased longevity. However, the presence of sex-dependent effects and the fact that major CVD-associated genes failed to impose a detrimental influence on longevity lead us to conclude that the aging process is highly complicated. Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Gene; Cardiovascular disease; Sex-dependent influence; Longevity; Survival analysis.

Introduction: polymorphisms of a variety of genes have been studied to see if they are associated with increased risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and longevity. Table 1 revised from Bladbjerg et al. (2001) shows the control group and centenarian group number and frequency for various genes related to haemostasis and regulating genes. Some of these genotypes were associated with lower risk of death and could contribute to increased longevity. However, the aging process is highly complicated.NEED: Studies have shown that some genes are associated not only with the incidence of Alzheimer's disease but also with mortality at old ages. Homozygosity of the APOE allele has been confirmed to have a deleterious effect on mortality at old ages (Heijmans et al., 2002), and significant depletion of the APOE allele has been found in French (Schachter et al., 1994), Finnish (Louhija et al., 1995), and Chinese (Zhang et al., 2003) centenarians. Other genes associated with polymorphisms and longevity include those coding for apolipoprotein A-I (Hegele et al., 1997), apolipoprotein C-1 (Myant et al., 2000), and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) (Galinsky et al., 1997; Nakata et al., 1997; Alvarez et al., 2000). However, no significant associations were reported in a study focusing on polymorphisms of genes involved in regulating blood pressure and blood coagulation in the Danish population (Bladbjerg et al., 2001). In this paper, we apply an approach derived by Vaupel and Yashin, developed in recent articles (Yashin et al., 1999; Yashin et al., 2001; Tan et al., 2003) on previously published data (Bladbjerg et al., 2001) and combine both demographic and individual genetic information sets to determine the relative risks of the observed genetic variations. This strategy can detect polymorphisms that show potential sex-dependent effects. We estimated the relative risks of the observed genes as well as gene-sex interaction and present sex-specific survival. This approach also incorporates important factors such as sex-dependent influences and unobserved frailty heterogeneity, which were previously ignored. Age-specific cohort population survival is calculated from cohort life tables for Danes born between 1900 and 1920, and the survival for each age is taken from the life tables.Cohort life table for people who reached a certain age is analyzed using a strategy to estimate the hazard of death for carriers (Br) compared to non-carriers or the baseline hazard g(x). According to the proportional hazard assumption, the hazard for carriers can be expressed as exp(ar). The corresponding survival function for carriers is Muo(x) while the cumulative hazard at age x is represented by H(x). Although any value of H(x) can be greater than zero, a gene allele with larger frailty increases the hazard of death while an allele with smaller frailty reduces it. Heterogeneity in individuals' unobserved frailty also contributes to survival. The average survival for a group of carriers can be derived as K(x|r) when the unobserved frailty follows a gamma distribution with mean and variance. Accordingly, mean survival for non-carriers is S(x), and for genotype, one can introduce a simple two-point distribution for the gene allele or genotype. The risk of gene-sex interaction (lg(99)) is defined as the risk of male carriers to that of female carriers. The average survival for the mixed population consisting of both carriers and non-carriers is obtained from population statistics. The proportion of carriers at age x in the data containing both male and female individuals can be constructed using Pn, Pm, Pr, Pn. In estimation, single alleles are used to reduce the number of parameters estimated. Parameters that maximize the likelihood function are estimated using Gauss software.

The results show no significant risk for the single gene allele, which is consistent with Bladbjerg et al.'s findings. However, three polymorphic variations (angiotensinogen "6"-7", FVII (6)-7,(10)) display significant sex-dependent effects that reduce hazards of death for male carriers by factors + and -. The highest likelihood was achieved when there was no significant risk for any gene allele. The significance levels for relative risks for genes and gene-sex interaction are determined by testing the statistical differences between the estimated risks and one with null hypothesis 0. The p-values for frequency parameters are obtained by testing Z.Fibrinogen-A, D/1--F/D in females is set to one, as Mw and Peereference. The result indicates that some polymorphisms that reduce the hazard of 3 are also favourable for male longevity but not for female longevity. In Fig. 1, sex-specific survivals for carriers and non-carriers of the angiotensinogen allele are plotted. Male carriers have better survival than non-carriers, but for females, it is the opposite, although the difference in survival between female carriers and non-carriers is very small. The observed and estimated proportions of carriers of the angiotensinogen allele by age for males and females are plotted in Fig. 2. While the frequency of carriers of the M-allele goes up with age in males, it tends to decline in females due to the sex-dependent influence of the gene frequencies for carriers of the gene alleles.

The p-values for the estimated initial frequencies are not shown since they are all significantly different from zero. Proportions of carriers of the three alleles are estimated as 7E7/E7, and respectively.

Incorporation of gene-sex interaction in the analysis produces results that were missed in the original analysis using the gene frequency method. The gene frequency method ignores gene-sex interactions when comparing gene frequency differences between control groups and centenarians. This could be attributed to the lack of efficiency of the gene frequency method when applied to small samples.

In the new model, the risk of gene-sex interaction is defined as an extra risk for female carriers compared to male carriers. Information from both sexes is used to determine the parameter of interaction. However, one important non-traditional epidemiologic approach, the case-only design, which was originally derived for analysing gene-environment interaction in disease prevalence can be introduced here to detect gene-sex interaction in human longevity when treating centenarians as cases.

Although this conclusion is compatible with our result, the case-only approach does not allow for evaluation of the independent effect of the allele but merely involves a departure from multiplicative effects. The relative risk model exploited in this paper is of primary interest as it not only tests for the gene-sex interaction but also evaluates the risk of the allele genotype as well as its initial frequency. In addition, it can also estimate the genotype-specific survival distribution.

Nevertheless, the easily applicable case-only approach is a useful tool for measuring gene-sex interaction in human longevity as it avoids the troubles originated from ordinary case-control design.

The results are unexpected as previous studies have found sex-dependent effects of these polymorphisms on other phenotypical traits. For example, the genotypes of the angiotensinogen gene were found to be significantly associated with variation in systolic resting and exercise blood pressure but only in males. The results indicate that genetic variation in the locus modifies the responsiveness of blood pressure to endurance training, but the functional impact is related to differences in sex. The gender-related effect in the genetic modulation of blood pressure is related to differences in sex.FVII plasma levels have been studied by Tan et al. Experimental studies in gerontology showed a stronger effect of FVIII plasma levels in male AMPs than in female Italians. Castelnuovo et al. showed that the clotting activity of plasma FVII has been suggested as a risk marker of cardiac death and Meade et al. suggest that FVII polymorphisms are predictive of risk in Italian studies. However, the putative relation between FVII polymorphisms and risk (i.e. -613T>A and -323Ins10) has been turned down in other studies (Lane et al., Feng et al.), and it may be speculated that this discrepancy is at least partly caused by an effect of gender. In women, FVII levels are increased by 1 year after menopause (Scarabin et al., Cushman et al.), and elderly women have higher plasma FVII levels than men of the same age (Scarabin et al., Ishikawa et al.). Also, women with coronary artery disease have higher FVII levels than men with the same disease (Kalaria et al., Ssei-Gerning et al.). Perhaps the effect of hormones and lifestyle factors drown out the effect of genotype on risk in women. Although there have been many studies on disease association, the present study reveals, for the first time, the sex-dependent association of the -603A>G and -323Ins10 polymorphisms with longevity. Genetic remodulation of human span has been studied in other studies as well, such as studies of the APOE alleles (Franceschi et al., Ivanova et al.), the ADRB2 alleles (Proust et al.), and the large norepinephrine allele group at the tyrosine hydroxylase locus (Benedictis et al., Martin). The sex-dependent influence indicates that the effect of a certain gene on survival could vary between the sexes. The existence of gene-sex interaction shows not only the complexity of the aging process, but also indicates that the two sexes follow different trajectories toward extreme longevity. The polygenic feature of life makes it imperative to take into account the unobserved heterogeneity or hidden heterogeneity in individual frailty for two reasons. First, there is unobserved heterogeneity in individuals' genetic makeup, which accounts for about 70% of the variation in life span according to previous studies (Herskind et al., Yashin and Jachine). Regarding the number of genetic variations that contribute to life span, Martin estimated that there could be up to about 150. In such a highly polygenic situation, it is advisable to consider the influences from other unobserved genes when making an inference from observed ones. Second, there are also non-genetic factors that have a predominant influence on life span, and these constitute another layer of heterogeneity in individual frailty. The existence of genetic and non-genetic heterogeneity in individual factors affecting span can influence an inference from an observed genetic polymorphism. In our analysis, we also tried to apply a simple model that does not take unobserved frailty into account. The estimated relative risks of gene-sex interaction for the three significant alleles were systematically weaker than they were in the heterogeneity model with risk parameters F71 for angiotensinogen, F7J for FVII (-603A>G), and F1 for 9p21.3. Differences in parameter inference present a good example of the difficult situation facing studies of longevity and multifactorial diseases. Individual heterogeneity in unobserved attributes is an obstacle that prevents us from unraveling the genetic component. We thank Oeppen from Cambridge University for useful discussions. The authors also want to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable suggestions that helped in improving the text. Alvarez, Alvarez, Lahoz, C.H., Martinez, Pena, Guisasola, L.M., Salas-Puig, J, Moris, Uria, Menes, BB., Ribacoba, Vidal, Sanchez, JM and Coto.EEE ALONE MILES Association between alpha-2 macroglobulin and H. polymorphism and late-onset Alzheimer's disease. Biochem. Biophys. Res. DF Apotech Yay, Teo System, EEE Mathematical and Statistical System. Vol. System and Graphics NNN AIO Apotech System, Maple Valley, WA. Sada, T., Oe, Kariya, See, Yamagata, TNZ., Asaka, EEE Apolipoprotein allele in Neurology DF Bladbjerg, OTN, EM., Reams Hee, Andersen-Ranberg, de Maat, Kristensen, SR,J , Jeune, Gram, JJ.J , Jespersen, J ME Ee Bet longevity is independent of common variations in genes associated with cardiovascular risk. ODHaemost. F- Chen, Me Zhang, Fan, Shi, Li, Chen, Zhang, Gu, EEF molecular variant rere eg AMOS ONS angiotensinogen gene associated with myocardial infarction Chinese Chung Hsueh Tsa Chih Clerget-Darpoux - Unraveling the genetic component of multifactorial diseases: dream or reality. Owetional AMMEN ee Statistical Review F D Cong, Hamaguchi NAT OES, Saikawa T., Hara S., Sakata EEF polymorphism of angiotensinogen ope eecodon and coronary artery disease in Japanese subjects. Am. J Med. Sci. Corder, Saunders en AM., Maree ae Strittmatter z NN ES PE Schmechel DE., Gaskell PC., Small GW Roses Haines JJL Pericak-Vance May Gene dose of apolipoprotein i type D allele and the risk of Alzheimer's disease in late-onset families. Science E Cushman M., Meilahn BM., Psaty BM., Kuller AN_ LH., Py eee, Dobs, AS., Tracy, RP., EEE Hormone Therapy. Inflammation, and Elderly Women Arterioscler EEFE Benedictis GI, Falcone EEI, Rose,G., Ruffolo, I IEE ES, Spadafora, IP., Baggio, ( , Bertolini,Mari,R,, Monti, Morellini,M., Sansoni, _P., J eee AN OM, Franceschi, JC,J multiallelic systems reveal longevity associations not detected by diallelic systems: The locus. Hum. Ne OO. Genet. EE Naty eeeomne- Benedictis,G., Carotenuto,L., Carrieri,( hae OYG., Luca,M., Falcone,.E., Rose,( , Yashin/AL, Bonafe, Franceschi, EEF Age-related changes of the genotype pool in ageing cohorts. Hum. Genet. -(cid:  ) // /-- Benedictis,G., Carrieri,(G.), Garasto,Rose,Varcasia,Bonafe, Franceschi,Jazwinski - Does retrograde response in human aging and longevity exist? Exp. Gerontol. JE Castelnuovo,A./ ~ope A./ Amore,C., eee EPS,Falanga/A, I oe Ne. Kluft,pene/Donati,Ape,M.B.,lacoviello,a i L/ modulation of coagulation factor VII plasma levels: contribution of different polymorphisms related Neo eee. Thromb. Haemost. F. D EJ Dorak,M.T., Mills,KL,Gaffney,D." MNES,Wilson,D.W.,Galbraith,Henderson,! Burnett,/EED zygous genotypes eeesand Ve Jo Datey Trae longevity. Hum.Hered. DD -J Frossard,RES,P.M., Hill,SH., Elshahat,YL, Mae,Obineche,_EN.,Bokhari,/steoes*\,AM.,IOOAN,Lestringant,NeOE,GG.,J,John, Abdulle,AM.,EEF. Associations of angiotensinogen gene mutations with hypertension and myocardial infarction in gulf population. Clin. ee OSS. Genet.: D D alinsky,I pee,Tysoe,( Brayne,TTS a, Easton,D.F., Huppert.I, Dening, TR., Paykel, I, E.S., Rubinsztein, D.C., and Pennington A. Analysis of the candidate genes for affecting human longevity reveals methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase and angiotensin-converting enzyme as candidates. Atherosclerosis and Gerdes, L.U., Gerdes, C., Kervinen, J., Savolainen, M., Klausen, L.C., Hansen, P.S., Kesaniemi, Y.A., Faergeman, O. The apolipoprotein epsilon allele determines prognosis and the effect of simvastatin in survivors of myocardial infarction: a substudy of the Scandinavian simvastatin survival study. Genet Epidemiol and Pellegrini F.D.V., Volpi E.M. Polymorphisms in the coagulation factor I gene and the risk of myocardial infarction in patients with coronary artery disease. Can genes prevent? Circulation and Heijmans B.T., Roos J.C., Westendorp R.G.J., Slagboom P.E. Common gene variants, mortality, and extreme longevity in humans. Exp Gerontol were also analyzed.

In addition to these studies, other research has looked at the influence of specific genes on longevity. For example, research has shown that the heritability of human longevity is high based on a population-based study of Danish twin pairs born between 1870 and 1900. Furthermore, the angiotensin gene polymorphism has been associated with variation in blood pressure in a Japanese population. Finally, polymorphisms in factor VII gene alleles display sex-specific effects on fibrinogen levels.

Overall, these studies suggest that genetics plays an important role in determining human longevity and that specific genes may be targeted to increase lifespan. However, further research is needed to fully understand the complex interplay between genetics and other factors that contribute to lifespan.And the risk of myocardial infarction. Engl. J Med. Ishikawa, S., Kario, Nago, N., Kayaba, Hiraoka, Matsuo, Goto, Miyamoto, Tsutsumi, Nakamura, ANeg ANCES, Shimada, MOAT S, Inoue, sees.K., Igarashi, _M., Factor VIL and hog reyes fibrinogen levels examined by SEX and other atherosclerotic risk factors in a Japanese population. The Jichi PA EES Medical School Cohort Thromb. Haemost. Ivanova, Henon, Iya, Lepage, Charron, Vicaut, Schachter. Factor VI alleles display dependent effects on survival and discriminate between individual land familial longevity. Hum. Mol. J Kalaria, Zareba, Moss, AS, Pancio, Marder, VS, Morrissey, JH., Weiss H., Sparks Greenberg HL, Dwyer E., Goldstein Watelet L.F., STAM EOIN Yh_ Gender-related differences in factors predicting recurrent cardiac events in patients after acute myocardial infarction. The investigators. Am. J Cardiol. Kervinen co-Savolainen oe Ea ASalokannel J Hynninen Heikkinen -Ehnholm Koistinen Kesaniemi Y.A., Apolipoprotein and polymorphisms longevity factors assessed in Indians. Atherosclero: //. Khoury MI., Flanders W.D., Non-traditional epidemiologic approaches in the analysis of gene-environment interaction: studies with controls! Am. eo Opp Epidemiol. Lane Green Scarabin P.Y., Nicaud .Bara Humphries Evans Luc Cambou Arveiler D., Cambien F., Factor VI polymorphism determines factor VIL activity in patients with myocardial infarction and control subjects in Belfast and France but it is not as strong an indicator of risk in the study. Atherosclero: //. Louhija, Miettinen, Kontula, Tikkanen, od eae_MJ., Miettinen T.A., sr, Tilvis, Aging and variation of plasma apolipoproteins. Relative loss of the apolipoprotein phenotype in centenarians. Thromb. Haemost. Macko, Kittner NS., Iy aes, Epstein A., Cox D.K., Wozniak Wityk RJ, Stern EB.S., Sloan MA, R,, Price T.R., Mies Depo., M arter RJ, Johnson CI., Earley CI., Meg NP AR TN ONO, Buchholz DW., Stolley PD., plasminogen activator antigen and stroke: The Stroke Prevention In Young Women Study. Martin, Genetics and the pathobiology of ageing. Philos. Trans. Soc. Lond. Biol. Meue M., Vaupel J_J.W., Holm Harvald, Longevity is moderately heritable in a sample of twins born FJ. Gerontol. DF #-DD Meade TW., Ruddock Stirling Y., Chakrabarti R., Miller .GJ., Fibrinolytic activity, clotting and long-term incidence of ischaemic heart disease in the Northwick OE LISD D OE Heart Study. Myant NB., Gallagher J, Barbir, Thompson .GR., Wile I, Humphries SE Restriction length polymorphisms in the apo I gene in relation to coronary artery Rey disease. JJ Nakata Katsuya Rakugi Takami Sato Kamide Ohishi Miki Higaki JT., Polymorphism of angiotensin converting enzyme, angiotensinogen, and apolipoprotein E in Japanese population with cerebrovascular disease. Am. J Hypertens. PTOssei-Gerning, N., Wilson LI, Grant PS., Sex differences in coagulation and fibrinolysis in subjects with coronary artery disease. Thromb. Haemost. Paulweber, B., Friedl W., Krempler ON, Humphries SE., Sandhofer, Association of Hism at the apo # Mpa * gene locus with coronary heart disease and serum very low-density levels. Arteriosclerosis Piegorsch, W.W., Weinberg NAT CR., Taylor J, Non-hierarchical logistic models and case-only designs susceptibility in population-based studies. Stat. Med. Proust, JJ. mite owwp, Moulias, ee.R., Fumeron F., Bekkhoucha, Busson, Schmid, M., Hors, and evity. Tissue Antigens. AnkinenT., OO, Gagnon, Me MS, Perusse, L., Chagnon, Y.C., Rice, AS., Skinner, JS., Wilmore, J J.H., J DC., Bouchard - AGT and polymorphisms; exercise: blood pressure in Family Study. Am. J Physiol. Heart and Circ. Physiol. -JE: F = JD Rothman, KJ, ON OLDE INDE, Greenland, SE, EEF BO. Modern Epidemiology. 2nd ed. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, PA. Saha, N., Tay, JS., A_ PS, I, Basair, JD NEE EE, Hong, SE. Restriction fragment length polymorphisms of the LPL and CETP genes and their influence on lipids and apolipoproteins in a healthy Chinese population. Hum. Genet. Scarabin, PY., Bonithon-Kopp, Bara, I, Malmejac/, Guize | , Samama /EE. Factor V Leiden and menopausal status. Thromb. Res. -J: --J -, D Scarabin, P.Y., Vissac AM., Kirzin JM., Bourgeat A., Amiral _, Agher | , Guize | , EEE Myant! N.B., Gallagher J, Barbir | , Thompson GR., Wile I Humphries SEFE. Restriction fragment length polymorphisms of the SOD1 gene in relation to coronary artery disease. Modern Epidemiology. 2nd ed. Lippincott-Raven Philadelphia PA. Saha N1 Tay JS1 A_2 PS1 I Basair JD NEE EE7 Hong SE7 Procoagulant-anticoagulant balance during hormone replacement therapy? A randomized fact NN IEEE placebo-controlled study. Thromb Haemost. F, -E, D Vaupel JJ.W., Manton, KG., Stallard, .E., EJE. The effect of heterogeneity in individual frailty on the dynamics of mortality. Demography / DED Vaupel, SW., Jouee ashin, oer AL, EF Pe NRHeterogeneitys - some surprising effects of selection on population dynamics. Am. JEJ = ang, Khoury, M., EEJ. Evolving methods in genetic epidemiology. IIL. Gene-environment interaction in stepwise epidemiologic research. Epidemiol. Rev. / D Yashin, AL, Vaupel, J.J.W., Andreev, IKF., Tan Fe, lachine | LA, Carotenuto | , Benedictis | , Bonafe ! Valensin, sep Ney eeee a Franceschi C., EEF ND. Combining genetic and demographic information in population studies of aging and longevity. J Epidemiol Biostatistics / -FE -ED Co ashin eee AL, Mowry eee- Benedictis | ,G." Vaupel OS J.W.", Tan NS AN , Andreev | . KF., Iachine | LA | , Bonafe! , Duca | , Valensin _S., Carotenuto MPN nn ss. Franceschi - Genes, demography and life - the contribution of demographic data in genetic studies on aging and longevity. NED ES. Am. Hum. Genet. //JF //E,(cid:  ) Yashin AL,_Tachine| LA /EE Genetic analysis of duration: Correlated frailty model applied to survival Danish Twins. Genetic Epidemiology -E Zhang JJ.G., Ma Y.X., Wang CF, Lu PF._S.B., N.F., Feng G.Y.| EEF Apolipoprotein and longevity among Han Chinese population. Aging /.D(cid:  )
