A study of French centenarians: are ACE and APOE associated with longevity? Hélène Blanch*, Ludovic Cabanne, Mourad Sahbatou, Gilles Thomas Fondation Jean-Dausset-CEPH, 27, rue Juliette-Dodu, 75010 Paris, France Received 8 August 2000; accepted 9 October 2000 Fondation Jean-Dausset-CEPH, 27, rue Juliette-Dodu, 75010 Paris, France Communicated by Jean Rosa Abstract Association study is the method of choice to identify genes involved in complex processes that result from the interaction of environmental and genetic factors. However, because of biases that increase the risk of false positive reports, preliminary positive conclusions have to be reproduced on other populations to be validated as firm conclusions. In 1994, certain alleles of two genes, APOE (Apolipoprotein E) and ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme), were reported to be more frequent in French centenarians, suggesting an association with such a complex polyfactorial process as longevity. Enlargement of the French centenarian cohort allows a new assessment of this hypothesis on 563 centenarians. In contrast to APOE, the ACE association was not confirmed. Retrospective analysis of the initial study revealed discrepancies that may in part explain this observation. Risk of reporting false positive associations is discussed and recommendations to set up a rigorous experimental design are proposed. 2001 Académie des sciences/éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS Résumé Les gènes APOE et ACE sont-ils associés à la longévité : étude de centenaires français. La recherche d'une association génétique est la seule méthode actuellement envisageable pour identifier des polymorphismes impliqués dans des processus complexes tels que la longévité. Néanmoins, du fait du risque de biais conduisant à des résultats faussement positifs, toute étude d'association doit être confirmée sur une seconde population. En 1994, deux gènes, APOE (apolipoprotéine E) et ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme), ont été associés à la longévité dans une population de centenaires français. L'élargissement de la cohorte initiale a permis une nouvelle évaluation indépendante en prenant les précautions méthodologiques requises par ce type d'étude. Tandis que l'association entre APOE et longévité a été confirmée, aucune différence statistiquement significative n'a été observée pour ACE. L'analyse rétrospective de l'étude initiale a révélé des problèmes méthodologiques ayant pu conduire à un résultat faussement positif. Des recommandations sont proposées pour permettre une conception rigoureuse de ce type d'étude. 2001 Académie des ACE / APOE / longévité / étude d'association 129 comparée des témoins hommes, sans appariement régional entre les deux populations. L'élargissement de la collecte des centenaires français et un suivi de la qualité des données génotypiques générées ont permis de tester ces conclusions sur une nouvelle population. Ainsi cinq cent soixante centenaires ont été appariés de manière rigoureuse sur le sexe et l'origine géographique avec cinq cent soixante individus plus jeunes de 50 ans en moyenne. La longévité humaine résulte d'un processus complexe dans lequel interagissent des facteurs environnementaux et génétiques. Ce trait phénotypique est caractérisé par une héritabilité faible et l'interaction probable de multiples gènes. Actuellement, seules les études d'association comparant les répartitions des fréquences alléliques et génotypiques de polymorphismes candidats entre deux populations de cas et de contrôles permettent d'aborder ce problème. Ces études doivent être conçues de manière à éviter des sources d'erreurs, telles que la stratification des populations testées, qui peuvent conduire à des résultats faussement positifs. Chaque résultat positif doit être confirmé dans une seconde étude indépendante pour être validé. L'étude d'une population de centenaires français, publiée en 1994, avait montré une association entre les gènes ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme) et APOE (apolipoprotéine E) et la longévFrance. In the present study, centenarians and controls were paired based on sex and geographic origin to improve the likelihood that both members of the pair originated from the same population. Additionally, whenever possible, the regional place of birth of the centenarian was matched with that of both parents of the control individual to account for any regional genetic differences. 

Second, DNA available from the initial cohort was genotyped again to ensure the quality of the original genotypic data. Inconsistencies were identified and rechecked to confirm the accuracy of the results.

The results of this study showed a significant difference in allelic and genotypic frequencies between centenarians and controls for the APOE polymorphism, with the E4E4 genotype being under-represented in centenarians compared to controls. The E3E4 genotype was also less frequent in centenarians compared to controls. These observations suggest that the E4E4 and E3E4 genotypes are associated with decreased longevity in both males and females. 

In contrast, no significant difference was observed between centenarians and controls for the ACE I/D polymorphism. 

Overall, this study provides additional evidence supporting an association between APOE polymorphisms and longevity in French centenarians. However, it is important to note that while statistically significant, the borderline level of significance observed for some associations precludes definite conclusions.cardiovascular disease: evidence from the ECTIM study. Strasbourg and Toulouse were used in the study, as well as non-related individuals from the CEPH families without documented birthplaces. It is important to match cases and controls for geographic origin because allele frequencies can vary regionally. Additionally, the laboratory that genotyped the ECTIM individuals for the control group in 1994 was different from the one that typed the centenarians. It is preferable to genotype all cases and controls in the same place and at the same time to minimize genotyping errors which can vary between different laboratories. The excess of the D allele for French centenarians reported in 1994 was not confirmed in this study. Several authors have examined the ACE association with longevity since then, but results have been inconsistent. Cases and controls were matched for sex and geographic origin, with each control defined as an individual whose parents were both born in the same region as that of the centenarian. This procedure samples the population at a time when population mobility was low and minimizes the effect of population immigration. The initial report of the association of ACE with longevity in French centenarians was based on a 6% difference in the D allele frequency, which may be affected by regional variation within France. Accurate genotyping of the I/D polymorphism of ACE requires reliable amplification of two DNA fragments markedly different in molecular size for D and I alleles. Sub-optimal PCR conditions can lead to misclassification of I/D heterozygotes as D/D homozygotes, resulting in overestimation of D allele frequency. Repeat genotyping by us revealed discrepancies in 17 of 338 individuals reported in 1994, suggesting that genotyping errors may have led to overestimation of D allele frequency in the centenarian population. Matching cases and controls is essential, and robust and standardized genotyping protocols should be used on large numbers of samples. The association of the APOE polymorphism with longevity was confirmed in this study, but the association of the ACE D allele with longevity in the French population was not replicated. It is likely that such an association exists in this population, but it would require much larger groups to be reliably demonstrated.Myocardial infarction. The ECTIM Study, Arteriosclerosis. Thromb. 14. [26] Faure-Delanef L., Baudin B., Benteau-Burnat B., Beaudoin J.C., Giboudeau J., Cohen D., Plasma concentration, kinetic constants, and gene polymorphism of angiotensin I-converting enzyme in centenarians, Clin. Chem. 44 (1998) 2083-2087. [22] Lonjou C., Clayton J., Cambon-Thomsen A., Raffoux C., HLA-A, -B, -DR haplotype frequencies in France - implications for recruitment of potential bone marrow donors, Transplantation 60 (1995) 375-383. [27] Lindpaintner K., Pfeffer M.A., Kreutz R., Stampfer M.J., Grodstein F., LaMotte F., Buring J., Hennekens C.H., A prospective evaluation of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme gene polymorphism and the risk of ischemic heart disease, N. Engl. J. Med. 332 (1995) 706-711. [23] Lucotte G., Loirat F., Hazout S., Pattern of gradient of apolipoprotein E allele *4 frequencies in western Europe, Hum. Biol. 69 (1997) 253-262. 135