A study of French centenarians: are ACE and APOE associated with longevity?

Hélène Blanché*, Ludovic Cabanne, Mourad Sahbatou, Gilles Thomas

Fondation Jean-Dausset-CEPH, 27, rue Juliette-Dodu, 75010 Paris, France Received 8 August 2000; accepted 9 October 2000

Fondation Jean-Dausset-CEPH, 27, rue Juliette-Dodu, 75010 Paris, France

Communicated by Jean Rosa

Abstract – Association study is the method of choice to identify genes involved in complex processes that result from the interaction of environmental and genetic factors. However, because of biases that increase the risk of false positive reports, preliminary positive conclusions have to be reproduced on other populations to be validated as firm conclusions. In 1994, certain alleles of two genes, APOE (Apolipoprotein E) and ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme), were reported to be more frequent in French cente- narians, suggesting an association with such a complex polyfactorial process as longev- ity. Enlargement of the French centenarian cohort allows a new assessment of this hypothesis on 563 centenarians. In contrast to APOE, the ACE association was not confirmed. Retrospective analysis of the initial study revealed discrepancies that may in part explain this observation. Risk of reporting false positive associations is discussed and recommendations to set up a rigorous experimental design are proposed. © 2001 Académie des sciences/Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS

Résumé – Les gènes APOE et ACE sont-ils associés à la longévité : étude de cen-

tenaires français. La recherche d’une association génétique est la seule méthode actuellement envisageable pour identifier des polymorphismes impliqués dans des processus complexes tels que la longévité. Néanmoins, du fait du risque de biais conduisant à des résultats faussement positifs, toute étude d’association doit être confirmée sur une seconde population. En 1994, deux gènes, APOE (apolipoprotéine E) et ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme), ont été associés à la longévité dans une population de centenaires français. L’élargissement de la cohorte initiale a permis une nouvelle évaluation indépendante en prenant les précautions méthodologiques requises par ce type d’étude. Tandis que l’association entre APOE et longévité a été confirmée, aucune différence statistiquement significative n’a été observée pour ACE. L’analyse rétrospective de l’étude initiale a révélé des problèmes méthodologiques ayant pu conduire à un résultat faussement positif. Des recommandations sont proposées pour permettre une conception rigoureuse de ce type d’étude. © 2001 Académie des

ACE / APOE / longévité / étude d’association

129

comparée à des témoins hommes, sans appariement régional entre les deux populations.

L’élargissement de la collecte des centenaires fran- çais et un suivi de la qualité des données génotypiques générées ont permis de tester ces conclusions sur une nouvelle population. Ainsi cinq cent soixante centenai- res ont été appariés de manière rigoureuse sur le sexe et l’origine géographique avec cinq cent soixante indi- vidus plus jeunes de 50 ans en moyenne.

La longévité humaine résulte d’un processus com- plexe dans lequel interagissent des facteurs environne- mentaux et génétiques. Ce trait phénotypique est carac- térisé par une héritabilité faible et l’interaction probable de multiples gènes. Actuellement, seules les études d’association comparant les répartitions des fréquences alléliques et génotypiques de polymorphismes candi- dats entre deux populations de cas et de contrôles permettent d’aborder ce problème. Ces études doivent être conçues de manière à éviter des sources d’erreurs, telles que la stratification des populations testées, qui peuvent conduire à des résultats faussement positifs. Chaque résultat positif doit être confirmé dans une seconde étude indépendante pour être validé. L’étude d’une population de centenaires français, publiée en 1994, avait montré une association entre les gènes ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme) et APOE (apolipo- protéine E) et la longévité. Tandis que l’association entre APOE et la longévité a été confirmée sur plu- sieurs autres populations, le résultat observé pour ACE n’a jamais été clairement reproduit. Cette première étude était basée sur la comparaison d’une population de centenaires, composée principalement de femmes,

La comparaison des fréquences génotypiques et alléliques a confirmé l’association entre APOE et la longévité. En revanche, aucune différence significative n’a été observée entre les deux populations pour le locus ACE. L’analyse rétrospective de la première étude a montré deux problèmes principaux : d’une part, un appariement peu précis entre les populations de cen- tenaires et de témoins et, d’autre part, un déficit dans la détection d’un allèle de grande taille (allèle I) condui- sant à une surestimation de l’autre allèle (allèle D).

Ces discordances soulignent l’importance d’une rigu- eur expérimentale et méthodologique dans la concep- tion et la réalisation des études cas témoins et la nécessité d’un appariement précis entre les deux popu- lations testées. La présente étude, qui tient compte de ces recommandations, a confirmé l’association entre APOE et la longévité, tandis qu’elle n’a pas permis de répliquer le résultat positif observé avec ACE.

1. Introduction

individuals with controls and stratification in multiethnic populations. These difficulties are overcome by the trans- mission disequilibrium test (TDT) and related approaches [5]. However, this test most often requires genotyping of parents who are, as mentioned above, obviously unavail- able for the study of longevity. Thus, at present, attempts to localize or define functional loci involved in human lon- gevity are based on case-control association studies in order to demonstrate statistically significant differences in allele frequencies at candidate loci between groups of aged subjects and matched controls. Such experiments should be designed to minimize false positive results by a rigorous sampling procedure. Case-control studies are usually performed on genes that may be candidates involved in longevity, because of their known or postu- lated function. Such candidate genes include those that may contribute to the risk of cardiovascular disease, the main cause of mortality in western countries, especially among individuals over 80 years of age. Thus, the first candidate genes to be studied for association with longev- ity were ACE and APOE. Polymorphic alleles at the ACE and APOE loci are known to be associated with an increased risk for myocardial infarction [6] and for hyper- lipidemia and Alzheimer’s disease (AD), respectively [7–9]. As early as 1994, 338 centenarians and 164 control individuals aged between 20 and 70 years were compared for the allele frequencies of these genes [10]. The provoca-

Prolonged human life expectancy, with consequent increase in the number of aged individuals, has stimulated the search for genes involved in longevity and ageing. A population-based study of centenarians showed that their siblings have an increased probability of survival to advanced age, indicating a familial component to longev- ity [1]. In addition, a study of British aristocracy estimated heritability of longevity to be between 0.16 and 0.37, depending on sex and age at death of both parents [2]. Nevertheless, it is difficult to distinguish between shared environmental and genetic factors. Studies of twin regis- ters estimated heritability of the phenotypic trait longevity in Scandinavian populations to be approximately 0.25– 0.50 [3, 4]. These data suggest the existence of genetic factors associated with longevity and, consequently, of functional polymorphisms located in genes that remain to be identified. Two types of genetic analyses are presently available for studies of human multifactorial complex traits such as longevity. The first method is linkage analysis which is impractical for the study of longevity because of a) the low estimated heritability, b) the expected large number of implicated loci, and c) the unavailability of parents of ‘cases’, i.e. of aged individuals. The second method, involving association studies, is prone to biases due to well-identified factors, such as loose matching of

130

Table I. Distribution of matched centenarians and controls.

frequencies for both genes between the two groups lated numerous attempts to replicate these observations different population samples.

Region of origin Number of females in Number of males in each population each population Île-de-France 39 13 North-east 103 22 North-west 113 12 South-east 155 27 South-west 56 20 Total 466 94

The association of the APOE4 allele with decreased longevity was confirmed in Finnish, Chinese and Japanese populations [11–13], thus suggesting that this allele is present in the corresponding populations with frequencies that lead to a significant population attributable risk despite notable environmental differences. Results of studies to confirm the association with the ACE polymorphism are less clear cut. Monitoring of potential progressive changes in allele frequencies of ACE as a function of age in a case-referent and in a retrospective cohort study of the Copenhagen population failed to reveal statistically sig- nificant changes, an observation which led the authors to the conclusion that ACE alleles do not influence longevity [14].

2.2. Genotyping

ACE I/D (insertion/deletion) polymorphism was geno- typed by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and subse- quent electrophoretic analysis. The two alleles of 190 bp (D, deletion) and 490 bp (I, insertion) in intron 16 were separated on a 2 % agarose gel as described [18]. APOE genotypes were determined by PCR-RFLP (restriction frag- ment length polymorphism). Amplicons were digested by HhaI and genotypes were determined after electrophore- sis on a 10 % polyacrylamide gel stained with ethidium bromide, as described [19].

It has, however, been suggested that the role of the ACE polymorphism in longevity may only be effective in very old individuals such as centenarians. The observed para- doxical effect of ACE D-containing genotypes on mortality has been interpreted as an antagonist pleiotropic gene action [15]. Galinsky et al. in a study of 282 British individuals aged over 84 years and 200 controls reported differences in ACE genotypic frequency in the male group of older subjects as compared to the female group and to controls [16]. However, the multiple statistical tests per- formed in this study and the near borderline level of significance (P = 0.03) observed for the association pre- clude definite conclusions.

2.3. Statistical analyses

Allele frequencies were computed from the genotype frequencies. Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was tested in both populations of controls and centenarians by a (cid:1)2 test with one or three degree of freedom for loci with two (ACE) and three (APOE) alleles (HWE software, J. Ott, 1988 [20]). Comparison of allele frequencies and genotype fre-

Since 1994, the number of new centenarians that have been included in the cohort initiated at CEPH has reached over 600. This new group of individuals provides an opportunity to reassess the proposed relationship between longevity and the ACE and APOE polymorphisms in the sample. Five hundred and sixty French centenarians were each paired with a younger individual of the same sex and geographic origin, and both groups were genotyped. In order to test the quality of the original genotypic data [10], DNA available from the initial cohort was genotyped again.

quencies between centenarians and controls were formed using (cid:1)2 contingency tests.

3. Results

Centenarians and controls were paired for two param- eters: sex and geographic origin. Both pairings were used to improve the likelihood that both members of the pair originate from the same population. Due to the large age difference (around 50 years) between cases and controls, it appeared desirable to match, whenever possible, the regional place of birth of the centenarian with that of both parents of the control individual. It was thus possible to match 397 centenarians and controls (71 % of the two groups) on the basis of administrative regions. When such pairing was not possible, the matching region was enlarged to one of the following five multiregional areas (Île-de- France, north-west, north-east, south-west and south-east France). This procedure enabled matching of the remain- ing 163 centenarians.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Studied populations

Centenarians were recruited when they were in their 100th year or beyond, after informed consent. Among the 932 centenarians for whom DNA is available for genotyp- ing, each member of a group of 560 centenarians was matched for sex and geographic origin with a healthy control individual. Each group was composed of a total of 466 females and 94 males. The age of control individuals ranged from 18 to 70 years (mean age, 51.2 years). The mean age of centenarians was 103.1 years (age at death or actual age). The geographic origin in France of males and females of both groups is shown in table I.

The groups of centenarians and controls thus defined were genotyped for the APOE and ACE I/D polymor- phisms. In order to develop a set of high quality genotypic

131

Table II. Genotype distribution of the APOE polymorphism and statistical analyses.

and 0.70, respectively). Thus, the data from both sexes for each group were pooled for further statistical analysis. Significant differences were observed between centenar- ians and controls for allelic and genotypic frequencies (P values both < 10–7). This statistically significant difference was also found when genotypes E2E2 and E2E3 on the one hand and E3E4 and E4E4 on the other hand were pooled to restrict bias due to the small size samples (P value < 10–8). The E4E4 genotype was under-represented in centenarians compared to controls (Fisher exact test, P value = 0.03). Among E4 heterozygotes, the ratio of E3E4 to E2E4 geno- type was smaller in centenarians compared to that of controls (4.2 % versus 17.6 %, P = 0.002).

Genotype Number of Number of controls centenarians (frequency) (frequency) E2, E2 4 (0.7 %) 2 (0.4 %) E2, E3 104 (18.6 %) 71 (12.7 %) E2, E4 13 (2.3 %) 7 (1.2 %) E3, E3 385 (68.8 %) 351 (62.7 %) E3, E4 54 (9,6 %) 123 (22.0 %) E4, E4 0 6 (1.0 %) Statistical analyses Hardy-Weinberg P = 0.06 P = 0.28 equilibrium Comparison of allelic P = 1.2 × 10–8 frequencies Comparison of genotypic P = 3.4 × 10–8 frequencies

Most of the centenarians belonging to the 1994 cohort (309 individuals [10]) were again genotyped for APOE. Comparing the new and previous data identified 18 incon- sistencies, which were rechecked and confirmed in the laboratory, leading to a discordance rate of 5.8 % for the centenarian data.

data, the following procedures were used. Control DNAs of known APOE and ACE genotypes were systematically added to each microtitre-plate of DNA from subjects and controls. Genotypes were scored from gel electrophoretic profiles, independently, by two different investigators, blinded to the status (subjects or controls) of the individu- als represented by the DNA samples. When misinterpre- tation of a specific allele was suspected, the experiment was repeated.

ACE allele frequencies were homogeneously distrib- uted between gender in both populations of centenarians and controls (P value for allele frequencies equals to 0.16 and 0.31, respectively) as were genotype frequencies (P value equals to 0.39 and 0.43, respectively). Thus, statis- tical analyses were performed using pooled data from both genders. Allele and genotype frequencies for the ACE I/D polymorphism are shown in table III. The relative frequen- cies of the II, ID and DD genotypes were not significantly different from values predicted by Hardy-Weinberg equi- librium in centenarians and controls (table III). Compari- son of allelic and genotypic frequencies failed to reveal a statistically significant difference between the centenarian and the control populations.

Genotype frequencies of the control group were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for both loci (tables II and III for APOE and ACE, respectively). Allelic frequencies at the ACE and APOE loci observed in the control group were not significantly different from those reported in the ECTIM study (Étude cas témoins sur l’infarctus du myocarde, ’Case-control study for myocardial infarction’) a large epidemiological study performed in the French popula- tion [6, 21]. Genotype frequencies for the APOE locus are reported in table II. Distribution of genotypes in the cen- tenarian population was in agreement with the Hardy- Weinberg expectation although the P value was border- line (P = 0.06).

Retyping the 1994 centenarian cohort for the ACE poly- morphism revealed 17 inconsistencies confirmed on a second experiment leading to a 5 % difference with the original data. In the majority of the discordant results (68 %), the differences resulted from the detection of the I allele in the new data, not reported in the 1994 data. Rechecking confirmed the presence of the I allele indicat- ing that discrepancies were mostly due to technical diffi- culties experienced during the initial typing to identify a large-sized allele.

For centenarians and for matched controls, APOE allele distribution between males and females was not signifi- cantly different (P value equal to 0.71 and 0.98, respec- tively) as was genotypic distribution (P value equal to 0.32

Table III. Allele and genotype distributions of the ACE polymorphism.

Allele No. alleles/centenarians (frequency) No. alleles/controls (frequency) I 467 (41.7 %) 490 (43.8 %) D 653 (58.3 %) 630 (56.2 %) Genotype No. centenarians (frequency) No. controls (frequency) II 103 (18.4 %) 101 (18.1 %) ID 261 (46.6 %) 288 (51.4 %) DD 196 (35.0 %) 171 (30.5 %) Statistical analyses Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium P = 0.33 0.29 Comparison of allelic frequencies P = 0.33 Comparison of genotypic frequencies P = 0.22

132

Centenarians of the 1994 cohort included about 20 % of individuals born out of France or with unknown birth- places. A new genotyping of these 184 centenarians revealed a higher D allele frequency (62 %) compared to that observed in the group of centenarians known to be born in France (748 individuals, D allele frequency = 57.6 %). Although these frequencies were not significantly different, this observation suggested heterogeneity in the geographic distribution of the ACE polymorphism and pointed to the importance of stringent matching of cente- narians and controls. Archival material for the 1994 con- trol group did not permit a similar test.

sidering centenarians and controls irrespective of gender. The significance of the association between APOE and longevity is more robust as compared to the 1994 study. This observation may be solely accounted for by an increased number of individuals tested (560 in the present study versus 323 in the 1994 study) since the allele and genotype frequencies in both groups were similar in the two studies. Clearly, the centenarian class continues to demonstrate deficits of the homozygous E4 genotype and of the heterozygous E3E4 genotype as compared to con- trols. Centenarians carrying at least one E2 allele or homozygous for E3 are more frequent than controls, sug- gesting that these genotypes favour longevity. Miyata et al. [24] showed that the APOE isoforms can be classified according to their anti-oxidant activity in the following > > decreasing order E2 E3 E4. It thus appears that the apparent effect of the APOE alleles on longevity may be related to their anti-oxidant activity. An increased risk for AD in females was reported for the E4 heterozygous genotype as compared to non-carriers [25]. Such suscep- tibility was not observed for males. This discrepancy may reflect a gender difference in the etiology of AD. In the present study, differences in the frequency of E3E4 geno- type between centenarians and controls were both signifi- cant and similar in the male and female groups. Taken together, these observations suggest that the E4E4 and E3E4 genotypes are associated with decreased longevity both in males and females. The influence of the E2E4 genotype on longevity remains uncertain due to the low frequency of this genotype.

4. Discussion

An initial report of association of a genetic polymor- phism with a phenotypic trait requires replication with an independent population sample to be generally accepted. This is especially so when the association appears to be paradoxical. The purpose of this study was to reassess the association of APOE and ACE I/D polymorphisms with the phenotypic trait of longevity in French centenarians [10]. In designing the present study, we analysed the 1994 report for potential flaws in design.

First, the initial study was based on cases and controls that had not been precisely geographically matched. The origins of the centenarians were dispersed throughout France. In contrast, the control population was composed for the most part of individuals recruited in Lille, Stras- bourg and Toulouse for the ECTIM study [6, 21] and to a lesser extent of non-related individuals from the CEPH families with no documented birthplaces. Matching cases and controls for geographic origin is essential, because regional variation of allele frequencies has been observed [22, 23]. Second, the laboratory that genotyped the ECTIM individuals constituting the major part of the control group of the 1994 study was different from the one that typed the centenarians. With the present laboratory settings, fre- quencies of genotype errors of less than 1 % are rare for projects involving the characterization of large groups of individuals (hundreds, thousands). Because the rate and type of genotyping errors may vary between different laboratories, it is desirable to genotype all cases and controls in the same place, and preferably at the same time.

In contrast, the excess of the D allele for French cente- narians, initially reported in 1994 [10], was not confirmed in the present study. Since 1994, the ACE association with longevity has been examined by several authors [14, 16, 26]. In a Danish population sample, relative frequencies of the DD genotype and the D allele were not associated with age in either women or men [14]. A study of a sample from a British population composed of 100 males and 170 females aged 84 years and older [16] suggested a weak association between ACE and longevity which was restricted to males. However, as discussed by the authors, the absence of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for the ACE locus in the control population hinders firm conclusions. Finally, Faure-Delanef et al. [26] genotyped ACE polymor- phism on 84 French centenarians who had not previously been studied. The data, when merged with those of the 1994 study, decreased the significance of the ACE geno- typic association.

For the present study, cases and controls were matched for sex and for geographic origin. The centenarian popu- lation is on average 50 years older than that of the control group. Thus, for each case, a control was defined as an individual whose parents were both born in the same region as that of the centenarian. Such a procedure samples the population at a time period when population mobility was low and minimizes the effect of population immigra- tion.

In contrast to the association of APOE with longevity, which relies on a two-fold difference in the E4 allele frequency in centenarians compared to controls, the initial report of the association of ACE with longevity in French centenarians was based on a 6 % difference in the D allele frequency (i.e. 0.61 in centenarians as compared to 0.55 in controls). Failures to replicate the association may by attributed to several non-exclusive factors. First, within France, the D allele frequency varies among regions by more than 3 % [6]. This variation may increase when

Using these matched case-control groups, the associa- tion of APOE with longevity was confirmed. As there were no sex differences, analyses were initially performed con-

133

Conclusion

different European regions are compared (e.g. 7 % differ- ence between Belfast and Toulouse [6]). Thus, it is man- datory to finely match control and centenarians on geo- graphic origin. Such matching was crudely performed in the 1994 study [10]. It could not be performed for 20 % of the centenarians who were of unknown or foreign origin in that study. Such a proportion may have contributed to the unusually high D allele frequency observed. Second, accurate genotyping of the I/D polymorphism of ACE requires reliable amplification of two DNA fragments markedly different for molecular size (190 and 490 bp for the D and I allele, respectively). It is well known that sub-optimal PCR conditions lead to the misclassification of I/D heterozygotes as D/D homozygotes, thus resulting in the overestimation of the D allele frequency [27]. Repeat genotyping by us of the centenarians reported in the 1994 publication [10] revealed discrepancies in 17 of 338 individuals. In the initial typing, the D allele fre- quency in these 17 cases was 79 %, suggesting that errors in DNA identification may not be the only cause of these discrepancies. Strikingly, 12 of these cases were initially typed as D/D homozygotes. Repeat typing classified 11 of them as I/D heterozygotes. Thus, it is likely that genotyp- ing errors in the 1994 cohort may have led to overestima- tion of the D allele frequency in the centenarian popula- tion.

The present discussion emphasizes the risk of reporting false positive association when rigorous experimental design is compromised. Matching of cases and controls is essential. Robust and standardized genotyping protocols should be used on large numbers of samples. Cases and controls should be interspersed during the genotyping procedures, thus ensuring an equivalent contribution to the genotypic data of both groups not only by each col- laborating laboratory but also by each individual set of experiments. The present study, which incorporated these recommendations, confirms the association of the APOE polymorphism with longevity. However, the association of the ACE D allele with longevity in the French population is not replicated. Although we may not exclude that such an association exists in this population, it is likely to be considerably weaker than initially claimed and would thus require much larger groups to be reliably demon-

Acknowledgements. We thank F. Péron for the recruit- ment of the elderly and H. Cann for helpful discussions about the manuscript. This study was funded by the ‘Ministère de l’Éducation nationale, de l’Enseignement supérieur et de la Recherche’.

[11] Castro E., Ogburn C.E., Hunt K.E., Tilvis R., Louhija J., Pent- tinen R., Erkkola R., Panduro A., Riestra R., Piussan C., Deeb S.S., Wang L., Edland S.D., Martin G.M., Oshima J., Polymorphisms at the Werner locus: I. Newly identified polymorphisms, ethnic variability of 1367Cy/Arg, and its stability in a population of Finnish centenarians, Am. J. Med. Genet. 82 (1999) 399–403.

References

[1] Perls T.T., Bubrick E., Wager C.G., Vijg J., Kruglyak L., Siblings of centenarians live longer, Lancet 351 (1998) 1560.

[12] Jian-Gang Z., Yong-Xing M., Chuan-Fu W., Pei-Fang L., Song- Bai Z., Nui-Fan G., Guo-Yin F., Lin H., Apolipoprotein E and longevity among Han Chinese population, Mech. Ageing Dev. 104 (1998) 159– 167.

[3] Herskind A.M., Mc Gue M, Holm N.V., Sorensen T.I., Harvald B., Vaupel J.W., The heritability of human longevity: a population-based study of 2872 Danish twin pairs born 1870-1900, Hum. Genet. 97 (1996) 319–323.

[13] Hirose N., Homma S., Arai Y., Kawamura M., Hasegawa H., Ishida H., Shimizu K., Osono Y., Homma A., Nakamura Y., Tokyo Cente- narian Study. 4. Apolipoprotein E phenotype in Japanese centenarians living in the Tokyo Metropolitan area, Nippon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 34 (1997) 267–272.

[4] Iachine I.A., Holm N.V., Harris J.R., Begun A.Z., Iachina M.K., Laitinen M., Kaprio J., Yashin A.I., How heritable is individual suscepti- bility to death? The results of an analysis of survival data on Danish,

[5] Spielman R.S., McGinnis R.E., Ewens W.J., Transmission test for linkage disequilibrium: the insulin gene region and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM), Am. J. Hum. Genet. 52 (1993) 506–516.

[14] Agerholm-Larsen B., Nordestgaard B.G., Steffensen R., Sorensen T.I., Jensen G., Tybjaerg-Hansen A., ACE gene polymorphism: ischemic heart disease and longevity in 10,150 individuals. A case- referent and retrospective cohort study based on the Copenhagen City Heart Study, Circulation 95 (1997) 2358–2367.

[6] CambienF.,PoirierO.,LecerfL.,EvansA.,CambouJ.P.,ArveilerD., Luc G., Bard J.M., Bara L., Ricard S., Tiret L., Amouyel P., Alhenc-Gelas F., SoubrierF.,Deletionpolymorphisminthegeneforangiotensin-converting enzymeisapotentriskfactorformyocardialinfarction,Nature359(1992) 641–644.

[15] Toupance B., Godelle B., Gouyon P.H., Schächter F., A model for antagonistic pleiotropic gene action for mortality and advanced age, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62 (1998) 1525–1534.

[7] Dallongeville J., Roy M., Leboeuf N., Xhignesse M., Davignon J., Lussier-Cacan S., Apolipoprotein E polymorphism association with lipo- protein profile in endogenous hypertriglyceridemia and familial hyperc- holesterolemia, Arterioscler. Thromb. 11 (1991) 272–278.

[16] Galinsky D., Tysoe C., Brayne C.E., Easton D.F., Huppert Dening T.R., Paykel E.S., Rubinsztein D.C., Analysis of the apo E/apo angiotensin converting enzyme and methylenetetrahydrofolate 177–183.

[8] Strittmatter W.J., Saunders A.M., Schmechel D., Pericak-Vance M., Enghild J., Salvesen G.S., Roses A.D., Apolipoprotein E: high-avidity binding to beta-amyloid and increased frequency of type 4 allele in late-onset familial Alzheimer disease, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90 (1993) 1977–1981.

[17] Sambrook J., Fritsch E.F., Maniatis T., Molecular Cloning: A Labo- ratory Manual, 2nd ed, Cold Spring Harbour Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbour, 1989.

[18] Rigat B., Hubert C., Corvol P., Soubrier F., PCR detection of the insertion/deletion polymorphism of the human Angiotensin Converting Enzyme gene, Nucl. Acids Res. 20 (1992) 1433.

[9] Poirier J., Davignon J., Bouthillier D., Kogan S., Bertrand P., Gauthier S., Apolipoprotein E polymorphism and Alzheimer’s disease, Lancet 342 (1993) 697–699.

[10] Schächter F., Faure-Delanef L., Guénot F., Rouger H., Froguel P., Lesueur-Ginot L., Cohen D., Genetic associations with human longevity at the APOE and ACE loci, Nat. Genet. 6 (1994) 29–32.

[19] Hixson J.E., Vernier D.T., Restriction isotyping of human apolipo- protein E by gene amplification and cleavage with HhaI, J. Lipid. Res. 31 (1990) 545–548.

134

[20] Terwilliger J.D., Ott J., Handbook of Human Genetic Linkage, The Johns Hopkins University Press, The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1994.

[24] Miyata M., Smith J.D., Apolipoprotein E allele-specific antioxi- dant activity and effects on cytotoxicity by oxidative insults and beta- amyloid peptides, Nat. Genet. 14 (1996) 55–61.

[25] Payami H., Zareparsi S., Montee K.R., Sexton G.J., Kaye J.A., Bird T.D., Yu C.E., Wijsman E.M., Heston L.L., Litt M., Schellenberg G.D., Gender difference in apolipoprotein E-associated risk for familial Alzhe- imer disease: a possible clue to the higher incidence of Alzheimer disease

[21] Luc G., Bard J.M., Arveiler D., Evans A., Cambou J.P., Bingham A., Amouyel P., Schaffer P., Ruidavets J.B., Cambien F., Fruchart J.C., Duci- metiere P., Impact of apolipoprotein E polymorphism on lipoproteins and risk of myocardial infarction. The ECTIM Study, Arterioscler. Thromb. 14

[26] Faure-Delanef L., Baudin B., Bénéteau-Burnat B., Beaudoin J.C., Giboudeau J., Cohen D., Plasma concentration, kinetic constants, and gene polymorphism of angiotensin I-converting enzyme in centenarians, Clin. Chem. 44 (1998) 2083–2087.

[22] Lonjou C., Clayton J., Cambon-Thomsen A., Raffoux C., HLA -A, -B, -DR haplotype frequencies in France-implications for recruitment of potential bone marrow donors, Transplantation 60 (1995) 375–383.

[27] Lindpaintner K., Pfeffer M.A., Kreutz R., Stampfer M.J., Grod- stein F., LaMotte F., Buring J., Hennekens C.H., A prospective evaluation of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme gene polymorphism and the risk of ischemic heart disease, N. Engl. J. Med. 332 (1995) 706–711.

[23] Lucotte G., Loirat F., Hazout S., Pattern of gradient of apolipopro- tein E allele *4 frequencies in western Europe, Hum. Biol. 69 (1997) 253–262.

135