Title: Association between six candidate genes and early aging in a population

Authors: Yongjing Xia, Ren Gueguen, Monique Vincent-Viry, Gerard Siest, and Sophie Visvikis

Affiliation: Laboratoire du Centre de Medecine Preventive and Unit INSERM 525, Departement Statistique du Centre de Medecine Preventive, Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France

Introduction:

The objective of this study was to examine the association between an aging indicator previously defined from a nationwide population study and lipids and apolipoproteins, angiotensin-converting enzyme, paraoxonase activities, and six candidate genes related to the aging process.

Methods:

Two hundred and fifty-six healthy Caucasian men (69.8±4.0 years) were included in the study. Total cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL-cholesterol, lipoprotein(a), apolipoprotein A1, B and E concentrations, and the activities of paraoxonase, arylesterase, and angiotensin-converting enzymes were determined by standardized laboratory methods. A multiplex assay was used to genotype the studied polymorphisms: apolipoprotein E, lipoprotein lipase, paraoxonase, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase, cystathionine -synthase and angiotensin-converting enzymes.

Results:

Paraoxonase polymorphism at codon 192 (Gln/Arg) was the only one significantly associated with the aging indicator. Gln homozygotes were more advanced in aging compared with Arg allele carriers. It was also observed that the aging indicator was positively correlated with serum concentrations of total cholesterol, triglycerides and apolipoprotein B and negatively with the activities of basal and stimulated paraoxonase and arylesterase. Multiple regression analysis showed that triglycerides and basal paraoxonase activity explain 13.6% of the variance of the aging indicator.

Conclusions:

Triglyceride concentration and paraoxonase gene and activities may contribute to the aging process. These results need to be verified in further studies on a larger sample size.

Background:

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is age-related and a leading cause of death worldwide. Elderly individuals who have avoided CVD should possess a protective and biological background in both genetic profiles and plasma constituents against CVD. Consequently, many studies have investigated genetic polymorphisms and serum variables associated with CVD in a general healthy elderly population to search for the biological factors contributing to successful aging. Therefore, we chose to examine the associations between lipids, apolipoproteins, ACE and PON activities, six common bi-allele polymorphisms, and the aging indicator (AI), representing the difference of biological age (BA) from chronological age (CA). The studied candidate genes are apolipoprotein E, lipoprotein lipase, paraoxonase, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase genes, cystathionine -synthase and angiotensin-converting enzymes. The polymorphisms of these genes are: apoE at codons 112/158 (2, 3, 4 alleles), ACE (Alu insertion/deletion alleles, I/D), MTHFR (Ala222Val or 677C/T), PON (Gln192Arg), LPL (Ser447Ter) and CBS (Ile278Thr).

ApoE is one of the major proteins of several lipoprotein particles and plays a central role in lipoprotein metabolism. Human apoE gene is located on chromosome 19 and has three common alleles, designated as 2, 3, 4, encoding three major apoE isoforms, E2, E3 and E4. The difference in these three isoforms lies in the substitution of amino acid at codons 112 and 158. In comparison with the most common isoform E3, E2 is associated with higher concentrations of apoE and triglycerides (TG) and lower total cholesterol (TC), whereas E4 is related to lower concentrations of apoE and TG and higher TC in plasma in European populations. Many studies have confirmed that the 4 allele is a genetic risk factor for both CVD and Alzheimer's disease with unfavored longevity, whereas 2 is regarded as a protective factor resulting in longevity, according to a French centenarian population study, although 1% of apoE 2/2 carriers suffer from hypertriglyceridemia.

ACE is an enzyme which catalyzes the generation of angiotensin II and also inactivates bradykinin, the two peptides playing a key role in modulating vascular tone. Serum ACE levels are under genetic control, and up to 50% of the variation is due to the I/D polymorphismof cardiovascular disease (CVD) and mortality (11). However, our study did not find any association between the PON gene variants and the risk of CVD in the elderly. The association found between PON genetic polymorphism and aging may be related to the hydrolysis of hydroperoxides by PON, which provides protection against oxidative stress and oxidative modifications of lipoproteins. The results suggest that higher PON activity is beneficial for successful aging.

We also found a significant association between TG concentration and aging, with elevated TG concentrations leading to acceleration of the aging process. This finding is independent of the common genetic polymorphism of apoE and may be linked to nutritional habits and energy metabolism in middle-aged subjects.

In conclusion, our study suggests that serum lipid parameters and genetic polymorphisms may play a role in successful aging in healthy elderly men. The association found between PON genetic polymorphism and aging supports the hypothesis that higher PON activity is beneficial for successful aging. Further studies are needed to confirm these findings and to investigate the potential therapeutic implications.For CVD, some studies have shown associations between the Arg192Gln polymorphism of PON and myocardial or CVD risk, while others have not found evidence of such associations. However, in our study, we did not find statistically significant differences in lipid profiles between various PON genotypes (data not shown). The observed association between PON polymorphism and the mean AI values obtained in each PON genotype may be partly explained by the multiple implications of PON polymorphism in lipid metabolism and by the new physiological role of PON activity in the hydrolysis of lipid hydroperoxides generated in lipoproteins upon oxidative stress. The difference in age (about 30 years) between our study and the two above studies on French centenarians may also explain the difference in results. Many studies have failed to show an association between MTHFR polymorphism and longevity in European populations (28). However, Heijmans et al. (29) found a decrease in the allele frequency of MTHFR 677T in an elderly European population compared with young controls (4.4 vs 12.2%), and concluded that this gene variant (677T) leads to a risk of mortality 3.7-fold higher in elderly subjects. Perhaps our sample size prevented us from obtaining similar results. To our knowledge, no study has investigated the association of CBS and LPL polymorphisms with aging, and we did not demonstrate any significant association in this study.

Besides the fact that TC is part of the estimate of BA, significant correlations of TC, TG, and apoB concentrations with AI may be due to their implication in CVD, which reduces successful aging. However, Kervinen et al. (6) found concentrations of TC and LDL-C to be lower in the elderly population. The work of Strandberg et al. (30) also showed a decreased concentration of TC with age in an elderly population, perhaps explained by less physical activity, or by changes in nutritional status, and the lower need for lipids in the metabolism in the elderly population.

CONCLUSIONS

We report here that PON polymorphism at codon 192, basal PON activity, and serum concentration of TG are biological determinants of the aging indicator, and suggest that they should be taken into account when studying aging in an elderly male population. It seems that carriers of the Arg allele are more protected against aging than Gln/Gln homozygous subjects. Because of the smallness of our sample size and the poor level of significance, these results need to be validated in further studies composed of a larger number of subjects.

REFERENCES

Schecter F, Faure-Delanef L, Guenot F, et al. Genetic associations with human longevity at the APOE and ACE loci. Nature Genetics ; 13: 25-32.

Luoma PV. Gene activation, apolipoprotein AI-/high-density lipoprotein, atherosclerosis prevention and longevity. Pharmacol Toxicol ; 86: 191-5.

Siest G, Pillot T, Regis-Bailly A, et al. Apolipoprotein E: An important gene and protein to follow in laboratory medicine. Clin Chem ; 41: 1068-86.

Stengard JH, Weiss KM, Sing CF. An ecological study of association between coronary heart disease mortality rates in men and the relative frequencies of common allelic variations in the gene coding for apolipoprotein E. Hum Genet ; 94: 205-18.

Strittmatter WJ, Roses AD. Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer's disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA ; 92: 4725-7.

Kervinen K, Savolainen MJ, Salokannel J, et al. Apolipoprotein E and B polymorphisms-longevity factors assessed in nonagenarians. Atherosclerosis ; 104: 117-22.

Blanche H, Cabanne L, Sahbatou M, Thomas G. A study of French centenarians: are ACE and APOE associated with longevity? Life Science ; 62: 2023-30.

Tiret L, Rigat B, Visvikis S, et al. Evidence, from combined segregation and linkage analysis, that a variant of the angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) gene controls plasma ACE levels. Am J Hum Genet ; 51: 197-205.

Krege JH, Moyer JS, Langenbach LL, et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene and atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol ; 17: 721-6.

Kang SS, Wong PW. Genetic and nongenetic factors for moderate hyperhomocyst(e)inemia. Atherosclerosis ; 129: 63-