New polymorphisms in the human poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 coding sequence: lack of association with longevity or with increased cellular poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity.

Received: 27 March 2000 / Accepted: 9 July 2000 / Published online: 30 August 2000 Springer-Verlag 2000.

Florence Cottet and Marie-Laure Muiras were graduate students at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes (EPHE, Paris, France) in collaboration with the Fondation Jean Dausset-Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (Paris, France). Cottet worked on the genetics of human longevity and Muiras received her Ph.D. from the University Paris VI, France, in the same field. Muiras is now a postdoctoral fellow at the German Cancer Research Centre (Heidelberg, Germany), where she works on clinical trials related to poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and its relation to genomic instability.

Abstract:
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1), encoded by the PARP-1 gene, is a ubiquitous and abundant DNA-binding protein involved in the cellular response to various genotoxic agents. In a previous study, we showed that maximal oligonucleotide-stimulated poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation was significantly higher in permeabilized lymphoblastoid cell lines from a French population of centenarians compared with controls aged 20-70 years, supporting the notion that longevity is associated with a genetically determined high poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity. Here, we describe four new genetic polymorphisms, three of which represent silent nucleotide variants (C>T, 402 T>C, G>A), and one of which leads to a valine-to-alanine exchange (T>C). We undertook an association study between two of these polymorphisms and human longevity or poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity in permeabilized lymphoblastoid cells. By analyzing 648 DNA samples from a French population (324 centenarians and 324 controls) by fluorescent-allele-specific PCR, we showed the absence of any significant enrichment of any of the genotypes in the study of centenarians versus controls. Furthermore, we studied genotype distributions from individuals who had previously been tested for poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity. None of the genotype combinations at any polymorphic site studied could be related to a high or low level of poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity. Together, these results strongly suggest that the longevity-related differences in the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity of human lymphoblastoid cell lines cannot be explained by genetic polymorphisms in the PARP-1 coding sequence, and that other mechanisms have to be considered as potential factors.

Marie-Laure Muiras received her Ph.D. from the University Paris VI, France, in the field of genetics of human longevity. She is presently a postdoctoral fellow at the German Cancer Research Centre (Heidelberg, Germany). Her research interests include poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and its relation to genomic instability. Florence Cottet was a graduate student at the Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes (EPHE, Paris, France) in collaboration with the Fondation Jean Dausset-Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (Paris, France), where she was interested in the genetics of human longevity. She is now in charge of clinical trials in a pharmaceutical company.

Fondation Jean Dausset-Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain, 27, rue Juliette Dodu, 75010 Paris, France.

Keywords: Human longevity, Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, Centenarian, Allele-specific amplification, Genetic polymorphism.

A. Brkle, University of Newcastle, Department of Gerontology, Institute for the Health of the Elderly, Wolfson Research Centre, Newcastle General Hospital, Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE4 6BE, UK.

Abbreviations: PARP: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase; ROS: reactive oxygen species; EBV: Epstein-Barr virus.

Introduction:
Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is a post-translational modification of nuclear proteins that facilitates the cellular recovery from DNA damage. This modification is catalyzed by the nuclear enzyme poly(ADP-ribosyl) polymerase-1 (PARP-1; EC 2.4.2.30), with NAD+ serving as substrate. PARP-1 is found in most eukaryotic species and accounts for about 85% of cellularThe pellet was resuspended in 3 L of loading buffer (formamide 83%, EDTA 4 mM, Dextran blue 8 mg/ml). Sequencing reaction products were loaded on 4.25% polyacrylamide/6 M urea gels and analyzed on an Applied Biosystems Gene Scanner 377A for 7 h (1.5 kV, 51°C). Signals were collected by the sequence analysis software (version 3.0, Applied Biosystems) and analyzed with Sequence Navigator (Applied Biosystems).

Materials and methods

Subjects and DNA samples

Centenarians were recruited with personal consent through the Chronos Project at the Fondation Jean Dausset-Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH) from all regions of France. They were Caucasians born in France and were at least 99 years old on the day of blood collection. The mean age of the centenarians was 101 years. Controls were selected from unrelated Caucasian individuals who were born in France and matched with centenarians for birthplace. The mean age of controls was 51 years. The proportion of women was 88.9% in the total sample tested (n=648) and 83.33% in the centenarian and control population, respectively, reflecting the differential longevity of women and men in France.

Peripheral blood leukocytes were routinely isolated by Ficoll gradient centrifugation, EBV-immortalized by standard methods, and cryopreserved in liquid nitrogen until used. DNA was extracted from EBV-immortalized cell lines by standard methods [30], resuspended in TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH7.6), and kept frozen until used as described below.

Allele-specific amplification of the PARP-1 gene at the T1011C and T2444C loci

We analyzed 648 DNA samples (324 centenarians and 324 controls), matched for birthplace and available in the DNA bank at Fondation Jean Dausset-CEPH, by allele-specific amplification of two regions comprising the TC and TC transitions, respectively. Each site was amplified in the presence of three primers, two of which differed only in their 3-most nucleotide (marked in bold). The TC locus: PexC GCT CCT CCA GGC CAA CGC; 2444 PexT GCT CCT CCA GGC CAA CGT; Pex19 ACC CTG TTA CCT TAA TGT CAG TTT T; the TC locus: Pex6T TGC 1011 AGA TCT TGG ACC GAG TAG CT; Pex6C TGC AGA TCT TGG ACC GAG TAG CC; and P2cb GGT TGG GTG TCT GTG TCT TG. Each one of the two competing, allele-specific primers for the nucleotide variation locus (i.e., PexT/PexC and Pex6T/Pex6C for TC and TC, respectively) was modified at the 5 end with a fluorescent dye (C6-FAM, TET; Applied Biosystems dye/Eurogentec), so that genotypes could easily be distinguished. PCR conditions were as follows: 40 ng genomic DNA, 0.2 M each primer, 4 mM MgCl2, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH8.3, 50 mM KCl, 200M each dNTP, and 2.5 U Stoffel fragment (Perkin Elmer) in a final volume of 50 l. Samples were denatured for 5 min at 97°C and subjected to 30 cycles consisting of 30 s at 95°C, 30 s at 64°C (TC) or 65°C (TC), 30 s at 72°C. PCR products (expected sizes 148 bp and 159 bp for TC and TC, respectively) were analyzed on an Applied Biosystems automatic sequencer A377. Sizing of the products and collection of numbers of alleles were performed as described by the manufacturer (Genescan Users manual, Applied Biosystems). Statistical analysis of results was done with the Chi-square test.

Sequence analysis of PARP-1 cDNA

EBV-immortalized cell lines from 18 individuals (nine centenarians, nine controls) were selected according to the level of PARP activity previously measured [15] (i.e., either extremely high or low PARP activity, respectively). Polyadenylated RNA was extracted from up to 107 cells with the QuickPrep micro mRNA purification kit (Pharmacia Biotech), resuspended in RNase-free water, and used as a template for reverse transcription with the Ready-to-go T-primed first strand kit (Pharmacia BiHomozygous T/T (EM) 18 B:186F72M1 / T 18 G:18F72M1 / C42002100, homozygous C/C (I198:19-v45m1 / T (BM) 9G:19-va5m1), together with a third unlabelled primer hybridizing with the opposite strand. Fluorescent dyes were assigned to distinguish allele-specific amplification products (i.e. one allele primer highlighted in blue, the other in green). PCR products were detected directly in the gel during electrophoretic separation on an Applied Biosystems automatic sequencer 377A. A single one-color peak represents homozygous genotypes, whereas two merged peaks of different colors indicate heterozygous genotypes. This allele-specific amplification methodology enabled us to analyze a total of 648 DNA samples from a French population (324 centenarians and 324 controls) by PCR amplification of the loci TC2444 and TC. We observed heterozygosity values of 26.85% and 48.46% for the TC and TC loci, respectively, in the control population (total number of alleles, n=648). In this latter population, the calculated polymorphism information content (PIC) values were 0.22 and 0.35 for the TC and TC variants, respectively. Allelic frequencies observed for each population at the loci TC and TC are presented in Fig. 3. We observed a perfect identity of allele frequencies between the two populations for the TC locus (Fig. 3A), whereas there was a weak and non-significant difference (χ2=1.705, P=0.2) at the TC locus (Fig. 3B). Hence, the comparison of allele frequency distributions between 324 centenarians and the same number of controls clearly revealed the absence of any significant genetic association with human longevity, both at the TC and the TC locus. Genotype distributions for the two populations are summarized in Fig. 4. We checked that genotypes were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the populations. The rarest genotype was homozygosity for allele C at both loci and for both populations (Fig. 4A, B). When we compared genotypes from the two populations, we did not detect any significant enrichment of any of the genotypes at any of the loci analyzed (locus TC, χ2=1.052, P>0.5; locus TC, χ2=2.9, P=0.3). The latter results suggest that there was no association between the long-lived phenotype and either of these two polymorphic loci. We ruled out any sex-related difference both in the centenarian population (288 women, 36 men) and in the control sample (270 women, 54 men) regarding the allele and genotype frequencies for the two loci (data not shown). 

Since we hypothesized that the TC transition could have a direct impact on PARP enzyme activity through the V762A point mutation, we focused on analyzing data concerning genotype distributions from individuals who had been previously tested for PARP activity [15]. None of the genotype combinations at any locus studied showed any association with a high or low level of maximal PARP activity expressed in cpm/106 (by the Mann-Whitney test: locus TC; total n=95; TT(n=69) versus TC(n=19), P=0.89; TT(n=69) versus CC(n=7), P=0.89; TC(n=19) versus CC(n=7), P=0.88. Locus TC: total n=94 individuals; TT(n=39) versus TC(n=42), P=0.76; TT(n=39) versus CC(n=13), P=0.92; TC(n=42) versus CC(n=13), P=0.69). Moreover, no difference could be found between the values of specific PARP activity assembled according to the three possible combinations of genotype at these two loci (locus TC: total n=40 individuals; TT(n=27) versus TC(n=11), P=0.15; TT(n=27) versus CC(n=2), P=0.86; TC(n=11) versus CC(n=2), P=0.55. Locus TC: total n=38 individuals; TT(n=16) versus TC(n=18), P=0.81; TT(n=16) versus CC(n=4), P=0.63; TC(n=18) versus CC(n=4), P=0.86). In conclusion, the results of the analysis of PARP activity as a function of observed alleles at nucleotide positions 1011 and 244The text has already been shown to modify the thermo-sensitivity and finally the activity of a protein such as the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) [38]. Moreover, the C-terminus region, in which V762A is located, is the region most strictly conserved during evolution of the PARP-1 protein sequence. This segment can be separated from the rest of the protein, generating a 40 kDa C-terminal fragment that retains a basal level of catalytic activity [39]. The crystal structure of the catalytic fragment of chicken PARP-1 has been described [40]. Residue 762 is located in the helical domain of the catalytic fragment of PARP-1. As depicted in Fig. 5 (G. de Murcia, personal communication), the closest neighbor of residue 762 is G888. This amino acid is part of the PARP-1 signature (active site) and is totally conserved during evolution. Hence, in order to relate a specific genotype pattern to a high or low enzyme activity, we focused on genotype distributions from individuals who had previously been tested for PARP activity. However, none of the genotype combinations, at any locus studied, showed any association either with a particularly high or low maximal PARP activity (expressed in cpm/106) or with the specific enzyme activity. Finally, analysis of PARP activity as a function of the observed alleles at nucleotide positions 1011 and 2444 of PARP-1 cDNA did not reveal any significant difference between individuals with different genotypes. This suggests that the polymorphisms TC and TC at positions 1011 and 2444 do not have any impact on the activity of the enzyme. Likewise, in independent work, it was recently shown that putative differences in enzyme kinetic parameters of PARP-1, such as V and K, could not account for the maximum differences observed in the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation capacity of human and rat cells [41], although the latter was positively correlated with the lifespan of these mammalian species [28]. However, one should keep in mind that in the present work, we have focused on seeking evidence for changes in the PARP-1 coding region that would confer increased specific activity in centenarians. Our findings might reflect the tip of the iceberg since (1) additional rare polymorphisms might exist in the coding region and (2) additional polymorphisms might exist in the non-coding region as well, for instance, in enhancer sequences far upstream of the coding sequences. Those may have an impact on the regulation of gene expression, and, hypothetically, changes in PARP-1 gene expression might influence the rate of PARP-1 protein turnover, and thus the functional status of PARP-1 protein. Using this reproducible and convenient method, we obtained data from 648 samples (324 centenarians and 324 controls). We calculated allele and genotype frequencies in each population to compare them and analyzed the association with human longevity. When we compared allelic frequencies and genotypes from the two populations studied, we found a clear absence of genetic association with human longevity both at the TC and the TC locus. We even observed a perfect identity of allele-frequencies between the two populations for the TC locus (Fig. 3). On the other hand, we expected that TC transition, which is responsible for a V762A exchange in the catalytic domain of the enzyme, would influence PARP activity. Although the structural consequence of a valine-to-alanine transition is expected to be rather weak, as it leads to the loss of a single methyl residue on the amino acid lateral chain, such an exchange has already been shown to modify the thermo-sensitivity and finally the activity of a protein such as the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) [38]. Moreover, the C-terminus region, in which V762A is located, is the region most strictly conserved during evolution of the PARP-1 protein sequence. This segment can be separated from the rest of the protein, generating a 40 kDa C-terminal fragment that retains a basal level of catalytic activity [39]. The crystal structure of the catalytic fragment of chicken PARP-1 has been described [40]. Residue 762 is located in the helical domain of the catalytic fragment of PARP-1. As depicted in Fig. 5 (G. de Murcia, personal communication), the closest neighbor of residue 762 is G888. This amino acid is part of the PARP-1 signature (active site) and is totally conserved during evolution. Hence, in order to relate a specific genotype pattern to a high or low enzyme activity, we focused on genotype distributions from individuals who had previously been tested for PARP activity. However, none ofConcept de base de Hayflick au concept de seuil critique d'accumulation d'erreurs. Pathol Biol: Harman D () Aging: a theory based on free radical and radiation chemistry. J Gerontol: Gutteridge JMC () Aging and free radicals. Med Lab Sci: Gracy RW, Talent JM, Kong Y, Conrad CC () Reactive oxygen species: the unavoidable environmental insult? Mutat Res: Schchter F, Cohen D, Kirkwood T () Prospects for the genetics of human longevity. Hum Genet: Finch CE, Tanzi RE () Genetics of aging. Science: Wallace DC, Melov S () Radicals raging. Nat Genet: Ames BN () Endogenous oxidative DNA damage, aging and cancer. Free Radic Res Commun: Breimer LH () Molecular mechanisms of oxygen radical carcinogenesis and mutagenesis: the role of DNA base damage. Mol Carcinog: Hart RW, Setlow RB () Correlation between deoxyribonucleic acid excision-repair and lifespan in a number of mammalian species. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA: Kirkwood TB, Holliday R () The evolution of ageing and longevity. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci: Muiras ML, Muller M, Schchter F, Brkle A. (). Increased poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity in lymphoblastoid cell lines from centenarians. J Mol Med: Althaus FR, Richter C () ADP-ribosylation of proteins: enzymology and biological significance. Mol Biol Biochem Biophys: de Murcia G, Mnissier de Murcia J () Poly (ADP-Ribose) polymerase: a molecular nick sensor. Trends Biochem Sci: Lindahl T, Satoh MS, Poirier GG, Klungland A () Post-translational modification of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase induced by DNA strand breaks. Trends Biochem Sci: van Gool L, Meyer R, Tobiaschi E, Cziepluch C, Jauniaux JC, Mincheva A, Lichter P, Poirier GG, Brkle A, Kpper JH () Overexpression of human poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase in transfected hamster cells leads to increased poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation and cellular sensitization to irradiation. Eur J Biochem: Frosst P, Blom HJ, Milos R, Goyette P, Sheppard CA, Matthews RG, Boers GJ, den Heijer M, Kluijtmans LA, van den Heuvel LP () A candidate genetic risk factor for vascular disease: a common mutation in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase. Nat Genet: Simonin F, Hfferer L, Panzeter P, Muller S, de Murcia G, Althaus F () The carboxyl-terminal domain of human poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase: overproduction in Escherichia coli, large-scale purification and characterization. J Biol Chem: Ruf A, Mnissier de Murcia J, de Murcia GM, Schulz GE. () Structure of the catalytic fragment of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase from chicken. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA: Beneke S, Alvarez-Gonzalez R, Brkle A () Comparative kinetic characterization of baculovirus-expressed human and rat poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase- Exp Gerontol, in press Caldecott KW, Aoufouchi S, Johnson P, Shall S () XRCC polypeptide interacts with DNA polymerase [beta] and possibly poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, and DNA ligase III is a novel molecular nick-sensor in vitro. Nucleic Acids Res.: Griesenbeck J, Ziegler M, Tomilin N, Schweiger M, Oei SL () Stimulation of the catalytic activity of poly(ADP-ribosyl) transferase by transcription factor Yin Yang. FEBS Lett: