Katja Lottermoser, Rainer Dsing, Peter Ervens, Brigitte Koch, Thomas Brning, Agapios Sachinidis, Hans Vetter, and Yon Ko conducted a study on the effect of the PAI-1 4G/5G genotype on longevity among 205 subjects aged 80 years and older. They used a light-cycler assisted method to analyze the PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism on the gene level. They found that in these 205 persons, the 4G/5G allele was found in 96 persons (47%), the 4G/4G variant in 62 (30%), and the 5G/5G allele in 47 (23%). These data are similar to the allele distribution described in other large cohorts not restricted to old age. Thus, the results of this study do not suggest an important contribution of the PAI-1 genotype to total mortality.

The primary function of PAI-1 is to regulate fibrinolysis. Elevated levels of PAI-1 may play a role in the development of cardiovascular disease. Studies on the significance of the 4G/5G polymorphism as a risk predictor for individuals with or without atherothrombotic disease have revealed conflicting results. Therefore it remains unclear whether the PAI-1 polymorphism is associated with an increased risk in morbidity and mortality.

The determination of this PAI-1 polymorphism may have important implications in the early detection of asymptomatic patients who have an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease. The study evaluated the 4G/5G PAI-1 polymorphism in 205 persons aged 80 years or older to evaluate whether aging is associated with the predominance of a certain PAI-1 genotype, possibly indicating the selection of a favorable allele.

The accurate assessment of its age dependency and proportional distribution in the population could provide additional information on the (patho)physiological relevance of the 4G/5G polymorphism. The allele frequencies were nearly identical among subjects with and without a history of cardiovascular disease within the study group.

Several sequence variations in the promoter region of the PAI-1 gene, especially the 4G/5G polymorphism, have been described. In vitro studies suggest that the 4G allele is associated with higher PAI-1 activity than the 5G allele. One possible mechanism may be derived from the finding that while both alleles bind a transcriptional activator, the 5G allele contains an additional binding site for a DNA-binding protein that could be a transcriptional repressor. In the absence of bound repressor, the basal level of PAI-1 transcription is increased. As gene variants of PAI-1 account for a significant portion of the interindividual variability in circulating PAI-1 antigen concentrations in the general population, there is increasing interest in determining the genotype of PAI-1. In a large cohort of men in the United States aged 40-84 years, the overall allele distribution has been described.Reported as approximately 25% 4G/4G, 25% 5G/5G, and 50% 4G/5G genotypes [20], real-time PCR fluorescence (F) cycles, melting curves, and fluorescence (F)-dF/dT reference values were used to determine the distribution of the 4G/5G alleles among cohorts in the United States, Japan, and Europe. A similar distribution pattern was observed in our group of 205 elderly subjects (Table 2). Subgroup analysis comparing the frequency of the PAI-1 4G/5G alleles between subjects with and without a history of cardiovascular disease did not yield any significant differences in allele frequencies among the two groups (Table 2). Thus, homozygosity for the 4G allele, despite its association with impaired fibrinolysis, is compatible with reaching old age. This contrasts with the findings of a previous study [21], which demonstrated a higher proportion of the 4G allele and the homozygous 4G/4G genotype in centenarians than in young individuals (P = 0.021 and P = 0.049, respectively). The latter results suggest an even better survival for individuals with the PAI-1 4G genotype despite its association with impaired fibrinolysis. Individuals with the homozygous 4G/4G genotype did not suffer more frequently from stroke or myocardial infarction, which is intriguing as high PAI-1 is considered a predictor of myocardial infarction in young men [18]. Despite this fact, the corresponding genetic marker is more frequent in the studied subjects who have escaped major age-related atherothrombotic disease and reached old age.

Fig. 1AC shows analysis of the PAI-1 promoter region covering the 4G/5G polymorphic site using a real-time PCR approach. Real-time PCR of PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism was conducted, and melting curves of 30 samples were obtained (fluorescence over time). The first differentiation of the fluorescence (F) over time (T; dF/dT) was also carried out. The melting maximum of the 5G-hybridization probe is 59.5°C in the case of the 4G/4G genotype, 59.5°C in the case of the 4G/5G genotype, and 65.0°C in the case of the 5G/5G genotype.

Table 2 shows the genotype distribution of the PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism among octogenarians. The table indicates that there were no significant differences in the frequency of PAI-1 4G/5G alleles between subjects with and without a history of cardiovascular disease. Table 3 demonstrates the genotype distribution of PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism among various cohorts (percentages).

Nevertheless, it must be considered that the 4G allele, which might be associated with higher PAI-1 serum levels, is not necessarily a disadvantageous marker. The activity of the fibrinolytic system is reflected in circulating levels of tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) and its most important inhibitor, PAI-1. Elevated t-PA antigen levels are strongly associated with elevated PAI-1 antigen and activity [26]. Increased levels of t-PA antigen have been shown to be a marker of risk for several thromboembolic diseases [27,28]. The pathophysiological background of this finding is controversial; one possible mechanism is the increased risk of arteriosclerotic plaque rupture under conditions of enhanced fibrinolysis. Thus, individuals with the 4G/4G allele may better balance increases in t-PA levels, and this could represent a possible mechanism for reduced fibrinolytic activity to be advantageous. This hypothesis is supported by evidence that thrombosis increases the expression and circulating levels of PAI-1 [29,30].

Nevertheless, the studied groups were small both in the cited 124 centenarians and in our study of 205 elderly individuals. Therefore, it cannot be excluded that differences between the results of these two studies are due to small numbers with the resulting statistical consequences. Moreover, we chose a group of persons who were 10-20 years younger than the centenarians, and this may also have contributed to the differing results.

On the basis of the results of our study, we suspect that other genetic variables and environmental conditions may be stronger predictors of longevity than the 4G/5G PAI-1 polymorphism. However, it should be acknowledged that the method of investigating single gene polymorphisms may identify only genes with a mono-causal genetic impact on health risks. Multiple logistic functions linking numerous genotypical and phenotypical characteristicsEriksson P, Kallin B, van t Hooft FM, Bavenholm P, Hamsten A () Allele-specific increase in basal transcription of the plasminogen-activator inhibitor gene is associated with myocardial infarction. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA: 
Margaglione M, Cappucci G, d'Addedda M, Colaizzo D, Giuliani N, Vecchione G, Mascolo G, Grandone E, Di Minno G () PAI-plasma levels in a general population without clinical evidence of atherosclerosis: relation to environmental and genetic determinants. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol: 
Ridker PM, Hennekens CH, Lindpaintner K, Stampfer MJ, Miletich JP () Arterial and venous thrombosis are not associated with the GG polymorphism in the promoter of the plasminogen activator inhibitor gene in a large cohort of US men. Circulation: 
Mannucci PM, Mari D, Merati G, Peyvandi F, Tagliabue L, Sacchi E, Taioli E, Sansoni P, Bertolini S, Franceschi C () Gene polymorphisms predicting high plasma levels of coagulation and fibrinolysis proteins. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol: 
Henry M, Tregouet DA, Alessi MC, Aillaud MF, Visvikis S, Siest G, Tiret L, Juhan-Vague I () Metabolic determinants are much more important than genetic polymorphisms in determining the PAI-activity and antigen plasma concentrations. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol: 
Grancha S, Estelles A, Tormo G, Falco C, Gilabert J, España F, Cano A, Segui R, Aznar J () Plasminogen activator inhibitor-(PAI-) promoter GG genotype and increased PAI-circulating levels in postmenopausal women with coronary artery disease. Thromb Haemost: 
Grant PJ () Plasminogen activator inhibitor-promoter GG genotype and plasma levels in relation to a history of myocardial infarction in patients characterized by coronary angiography. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol: 
Roest M, van der Schouw YT, Banga JD, Tempelman MJ, de Groot PG, Sixma JJ, Grobbee DE () Plasminogen activator inhibitor G polymorphism is associated with decreased risk of cerebrovascular mortality in older women. Circulation: 
Nicoloso G, Hauert J, Kruithof EK, Van Melle G, Bachmann F () Fibrinolysis in normal subjects - comparison between plasminogen activator inhibitor and other components of the fibrinolytic system. Thromb Haemost: 
Ridker PM, Vaughan DE, Stampfer MJ, Manson JE, Hennekens CH () Endogenous tissue-type plasminogen activator and risk of myocardial infarction. Lancet: 
Jansson JH, Olofsson BO, Nilsson TK () Predictive value of tissue plasminogen activator mass concentration on long-term mortality in patients with coronary artery disease: a 5-year follow-up. Circulation: 
Fujii S, Abendschein DR, Sobel BE () Augmentation of plasminogen activator inhibitor type activity in plasma by thrombosis and by thrombolysis. J Am Coll Cardiol: 
Fujii S, Sawa H, Saffitz JE, Lucore CL, Sobel BE () Induction of endothelial cell expression of the plasminogen activator inhibitor type gene by thrombosis in vivo. Circulation: 
Grubic N, Stegnar M, Peternel P, Kaiser A, Binder BR () A novel G/A and the GG polymorphism within the promoter of the plasminogen activator inhibitor gene in patients with deep vein thrombosis. Thromb Res: