Telomere maintenance genes SIRT1 and XRCC6 impact age-related decline in telomere length, but only SIRT1 is associated with human longevity. Sangkyu Kim, Xiuhua Bi, Malwina Czarny-Ratajczak, Jianliang Dai, David A. Welsh, Leann Myers, Michael A. Welsch, Katie E. Cherry, Jonathan Arnold, Leonard W. Poon, and S. Michal Jazwinski received the article on 27 July 2011, accepted it on 20 September 2011, and published it online on 5 October 2011. Leukocyte telomere length is widely considered a biomarker of human age and in many studies indicative of health or disease. We have obtained quantitative estimates of telomere length from blood leukocytes in a population sample, confirming results of previous studies that telomere length significantly decreases with age. Telomere length was also positively associated with several measures of healthy aging, but this relationship was dependent on age. We screened two genes known to be involved in telomere maintenance for association with the age-related decline in telomere length to identify candidate longevity-associated genes. A single-nucleotide polymorphism located in the SIRT1 gene and another in the 30 flanking region of XRCC6 had significant effects on telomere length. At each bi-allelic locus, the minor variant was associated with longer telomeres, though the mode of inheritance fitting best differed between the two genes. No statistical interaction was detected for telomere length between the SIRT1 and XRCC6 variants or between these polymorphisms and age. The SIRT1 locus was significantly associated with longevity (P < 0.003). The frequency of the minor allele was higher in long-lived cases than in young controls, which coincides with the protective role of the minor variant for telomere length. In contrast, the XRCC6 variant was not associated with longevity. Furthermore, it did not affect the association of SIRT1 with survival. The association of the same variant with longevity was near significant (P < 0.07) in a second population. These results suggest a role of SIRT1 in linking telomere length and exceptional survival. 

Introduction: 

Telomere length shortens with each cell division in most somatic cells, due to the end-replication problem (Harley 1991). Telomere shortening also occurs with cellular senescence and aging in vivo, but its status as a biomarker of human aging is not settled (Shawi and Autexier 2008; Mather et al. 2011). Shortened telomeres are also found in cancer cells, and they are associated with high cancer incidence and mortality, although this association may be related to the presence of the disease and may not be a good predictor of cancer risk (Pooley et al. 2010; Willeit et al. 2010; von Zglinicki 2002). Indeed, longer telomeres appear to be a risk factor for development of cancer according to some studies (Arbeev et al. 2011). Telomere length has been associated with many other factors or conditions, such as oxidative damage (von Zglinicki 2002), UV irradiation (Rochette and Brash 2010), unhealthy lifestyle (Mirabello et al. 2009), and physical and mental functions (Grodstein et al. 2008; Cherkas et al. 2008; Ludlow et al. 2008). Among several age-related decrements, cognitive decline has been associated with decreased telomere length (Devore et al. 2011).

Telomere length can also be maintained through alternative lengthening mechanisms in the absence of telomerase activity, as described in cancer cells (Bryan et al. 1997; Reddel et al. 2001; Reddel and Bryan 2003). These alternative mechanisms include homologous recombination (HR) or non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). In NHEJ, which involves the Ku heterodimer and DNA ligase complex, DNA ends are directly fused without the need for substantial homology (Moore and Haber 1996). Ku consists of Ku70 and Ku80 encoded by XRCC6 and XRCC5, respectively (Critchlow and Jackson 1998; Riha et al. 2006). In normal cells with intact telomeres, Ku promotes genomic stability by repressing intra- or inter-chromatid exchange via the telomeric repeats (Celli et al. 2006). In human somatic cells, induced loss of either Ku subunit results in cell death with substantial telomereNumber of subjects in telomere analyses are in parentheses. b. Nonagenarian in LHAS, centenarian in GCS. c. Years old. d. Years old. e. Louisiana Healthy Aging Study. f. Georgia Centenarian Study. (TRF) lengths were determined by Southern blot analysis (Cawthon 2002, 2009; Pavesi et al., 2009). However, there seems to be large between-study variation in the correlation of the two measures: One unit of T/S corresponds to approximately 610 kb in TRF length, depending on the reference sample used and other experimental conditions.

Telomere length determination: Average telomere length in white blood cells was estimated using a quantitative polymerase chain reaction method (q-PCR), as described (Cawthon, 2002; Terry et al., 2008; Cawthon, 2009) with modifications. Briefly, genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood and quantified using the Picogreen assay (Ahn et al., 1996). To estimate telomere length, two q-PCRs were applied to each sample, a single-copy-gene-specific q-PCR for beta-globin and a telomere-specific q-PCR. A telomere/single-copy gene (T/S) ratio was calculated for each sample using the q-PCR results and normalized to the T/S ratio of a reference sample. The normalized T/S ratio was used as an estimate of the relative telomere length.

Other phenotypic variables: Collection of data for health deficit variables construction of the deficit index are essentially described (Jazwinski et al., 2010). Briefly, the index (DI) was derived as the unweighted count of number of deficits divided by the total number possible deficits (N = 48) in an individual. The reported medical history questionnaire was administered to all study participants, and its components used to construct the deficit index. This was supplemented with items from an activities-of-daily (ADL) questionnaire. The continuous-scale function performance test involves the performance of ten standardized tasks (CS-PFP10) representing activities of daily living including carrying, donning clothes, sweeping the floor, loading a climbing stairs along with a 6-min timed walk (Guralnik et al., 1996, 2005). The Yale Physical Activity is to assess physical function and activity (DiPietro et al., 1993). We used one of its indices, Yale Energy Expenditure (YEE), which is the time spent for each activity multiplied by intensity code, expressed as kilocalories per Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was used to screen for cognitive impairment (Folstein et al., Rovner and Folstein, 1987). Age of subjects verified using both documentary evidence and graphic questionnaires. Mortality data were obtained using Social Security Death Index search.

Genotyping: The Illumina GoldenGate assay was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. SNPs were selected according to the Illumina Assay Design Tool. Following completion of the assay, all the samples were analyzed using Illumina GenomeStudio. Initial clustering was performed with the 10th percentile GenCall score set at 0.4 for both samples and SNPs. Samples with call rates below 90% were removed, and those remaining samples were re-clustered. SNPs not in Hardy-Weinberg proportions or with minor allele frequency lower than 1% were removed.

SNP rs7896005 (A/G; A is ancestral) is located in an intron of SIRT1. It is part of a large linkage disequilibrium (LD) block encompassing the entire gene (Online Resource 2). The A allele of rs7896005 shows great ethnic variation in frequency: in the HapMap-CEU sample, its frequency is 0.288; whereas in Asian and African samples, it exceeds 0.8. The SNP rs132793 (G/A) is located in the intergenic region between the convergent XRCC6 and NHP2L1 genes on chromosome 22 (Online Resource 3). According to the dbSNP database, the G allele of rs132793 is ancestral with its frequency ranging from about 0.8 in the HapMap-CEU sample to almost unity in the HapMap-YRI. It is located about 3.6 kb downstream from the end of the last exon of XRCC6 and about 6.3 kb downstream from the end of the last exon of NHP2L1. XRCC6 is about 4,300 nucleotides long from the first exon to the last (including introns), and the NHP2L1 is about 1,500 nucleotides long. NHP2L1 is a human orthWith regards to SIRT1 and telomere maintenance, the XRCC6 SNP rs132793 in the 30 flanking region of this gene is in high linkage disequilibrium (D0 = 1) with two SNPs in the promoter region and one in the first intron of XRCC6 (Online Resource 3). This SNP has been used as a marker for XRCC6 in several studies (Sobczuk et al. 2010; Li et al. 2011; Liu et al. 2007). No significant differences in genotype distribution of the SNP were observed between males and females, and the population sample was in Hardy-Weinberg proportions for variation at this locus (P >| 0.1).

In Fig. 1, a plot of normal log-transformed telomere length (T/S) versus age with a linear regression slope is shown. Each circle represents an individual subject. The mean T/S ratios significantly differed between subjects grouped according to the genotypes of rs132793 (P = 1.91 x 10^-2, Table 4). The mean T/S values increased as the number of copies of the minor allele A increased, resulting in significant differences between GG and AA groups (P = 4.36 x 10^-2) and GG and AG + AA combined groups (P = 4.42 x 10^-2). The association of T/S with rs132793 was examined in detail using multiple linear regression (Table 3). The additive mode of inheritance for the genetic effect of the minor allele was statistically significant (model b), and the significance persisted after adjustment for age (model c). These results indicate that shorter telomeres are associated with rs132793.

It is worth noting that the overall gender difference in health status may well reflect the shorter telomeres associated with rs132793, as males scored significantly better than females on the DI (P = 1.62 x 10^-5). According to Cox regression, there was no association of T/S with survival (P >| 0.1), but survival was highly dependent on age (P = 9.14 x 10^-12).

Regarding SIRT1 and telomere length, the SIRT1 SNP rs7896005, located in an intron and part of an LD block in SIRT1, had a significant association with T/S independent of age and XRCC6 SNP rs132793 (Table 3). The minor allele A of rs7896005 was associated with longer telomeres. In addition, the frequency of the minor allele of the SIRT1 SNP rs7896005 was higher in the long-lived cases (C90 years old) than in the young controls (20-59 years old) of the LHAS population (Table 5), and logistic models predicted that the odds of homozygotes of the minor allele being associated with the long-living case group is more than two-fold higher than the odds of other genotype carriers (Table 6).

Finally, we tested whether rs132793 is associated with longevity, but found no significant differences in allele and genotype frequencies between nonagenarian cases and young controls of the LHAS population (Table 5). Incorporation of the XRCC6 SNP rs132793 in the same logistic model with the SIRT1 SNP rs7896005 showed that the association with longevity of SIRT1 persists independently of XRCC6 (Table 6).

In conclusion, our study found that telomere shortening occurs with age and that function ability decreased with telomere shortening. The SIRT1 and XRCC6 SNPs had significant effects on telomere length, with rs7896005 in SIRT1 having significant effects on longevity. The effects of the SNPs on telomere length were independent of age, and the effects of the SIRT1 and XRCC6 were independent of each other.We consider different pathways of maintenance, involving either SIRT1 or XRCC6, even though these genes seem to overlap each other in some of their functions. As for rs132793, this SNP lies between XRCC6 and NHP2L1 (Online Resource 3); see Materials and Methods for details. Upstream of NHP2L1 (farther downstream of XRCC6) lies a gene called MEI1, and we found that a few SNPs in MEI1 are also in high LD with rs132793 (not shown). This gene is expressed specifically in the testis and is required for normal meiotic chromosome synapsis (Libby et al. 2003; Sato et al. 2006). Because we didn't see any sex-specific phenotypes of rs132793, we rule out MEI1 as a gene responsible for the effects of rs132793 described in this article. SNP rs132793 is in high LD with four SNPs in or near XRCC6. Of these, according to our database search, rs132770 in the 50 promoter region of XRCC6 has regulatory potential. It is located 30 nucleotides upstream of the start of the first exon, and the locus is part of several transcription factor binding sites, with the profile of predicted binding factors and their affinities substantially varying depending on the alleles present. The possibility that SIRT1 and XRCC6 are in different pathways for telomere maintenance could explain the lack of any statistical interaction between the two genes observed in this study. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that our study was not powered enough to detect such interactions due to either insufficient sample sizes or suboptimal statistical modeling. In this regard, we note the high variability of T/S values throughout the age range (Fig. 1), which resulted in low R2 values in all the models of linear regression. Thus, the rate of telomere shortening is likely to vary among different individuals of the same age group, and this suggests additional factors, such as individual-specific environments, are in operation. It is also important to acknowledge the imperfect measure of global telomere shortening that leukocyte telomere length provides. Among the factors contributing to this limitation is the superposition of the state of the leukocyte population itself, which can undergo periodic fluctuations. A statistically significant effect of size was seen, but GCS was not, and this is reflected in its near significance (P = 0.0696). The genetic architecture of the two populations differs, as evidenced even by the LD profile in the SIRT1 gene (Online Resource 2). Thus, the complex genetic and environmental nature of exceptional longevity must be taken into account. This complexity includes potential gene-gene and gene-environment interactions, as seen in other studies (Jazwinski et al. 2010; Bergman et al. 2007). This remains an area open to further investigation.

Our study suggests that telomere shortening occurs, at least in part, in an age-independent manner, and that SIRT1 and XRCC6 define two pathways impinging on this telomere decline. Obviously, operation of multiple genetic pathways for telomere maintenance adds flexibility and complexity to the age-dependent default rate of telomere attrition. One can imagine that these pathways may act as modulators of environmental factors or conditions that bear the potential to afflict telomere integrity leading to genomic instability.

Acknowledgments Supported by grants from the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health (P01AG022064 and P01AG017553) and by the Louisiana Board of Regents through the Millennium Trust Health Excellence Fund [HEF(2001-06)-02]. We thank the people of Louisiana and Georgia for participation in our study. We acknowledge the valuable recruitment, data acquisition, data management, and fiscal management efforts of M. Cervantes, D. Rouzan, T. Beard, M. Burgess, K. Grier, E. Jackson, E. McCarthy, K. Shaw, L. Strong, S. Reynolds, S. Anderson, E. Cassidy, M. Janke, T. Savla, and M. Poon. Additional authors include for The Louisiana Healthy Aging Study: M. Allen, I.E. Antikainen, A.M. Arce, J. Arceneaux, Mark A. Batzer, E.O. Boudreaux, L. Byerley, P.A. Callinan, C.M. Champagne, H. Cheng, Y.-W. Chiu, L. Cosenza, M.E. Cress, J.P. DeLany, J.Denver, A.Deutsch,M.J.deVeer,D.A.Dobrosielski,R.Ellis,A.Ermolao,M.Erwin,J.Fabre,E.Fontham,MSurvey for Assessing Physical Activity Among Older Adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc (): Duca M, Vekhoff P, Oussedik K, Halby L, Arimondo PB () The Triple Helix: Years Later, the Outcome. Nucleic Acids Res (): Flachsbart F, Croucher PJ, Nikolaus S, Hampe J, Cordes C, Schreiber S, Nebel A () Sirtuin (SIRT) sequence variation is not associated with exceptional human longevity. Exp Gerontol (): Folstein MF, Folstein SE, Mugh PR () Mini-Mental State: A Practical Method for Grading the Cognitive State of Patients for the Clinician. J Psychiatr Res (): Friedrich U, Griese E, Schwab M, Fritz P, Thon K, Klotz U () Telomere length in different tissues of elderly patients. Mech Ageing Dev (): Gabriel SB, Schaffner SF, Nguyen H, Moore JM, Roy J, Blumenstiel B, Higgins J, Delice M, Lochner A, Faggart M, Liu-Cordero SN, Rotimi C, Adeyemo A, Cooper R, Ward R, Lander ES, Daly MJ, Altshuler D () The structure of haplotype blocks in the human genome. Science (): Goni JR, de la Cruz X, Orozco M () Triplex-forming oligonucleotide target sequences in the human genome. Nucleic Acids Res (): Grodstein F, van Oijen M, Irizarry MC, Rosas HD, Hyman BT, Growdon JH, De Vivo I () Shorter telomeres may mark early risk of dementia: preliminary analysis of participants from the Nurses Health Study. PLoS One (): Guarente L., Kenyon C () Genetic pathways that regulate ageing in model organisms. Nature (): Harley CB () Telomere loss: Mitotic clock or genetic time bomb? Mutat Res (): Hastie ND, Dempster M, Dunlop MG, Thompson AM, Green DK, Allshire RC () Telomere reduction in human colorectal carcinoma and with ageing. Nature (): Iwama H, Ohyashiki K, Ohyashiki JH, Hayashi S, Yahata N, Ando K, Toyama K, Hoshika A, Takasaki M, Mori M, Shay JW () Telomeric length and telomerase activity vary with age in peripheral blood cells obtained from normal individuals. Hum Genet (): Jazwinski SM, Kim S, Dai J, Li L, Bi X, Jiang JC, Arnold J, Batzer MA, Walker JA, Welsh DA, Lefante CM, Volaufova J, Myers L, Su LJ, Hausman DB, Miceli MV, Ravussin E, Poon LW, Cherry KE and Welsch MA () HRAS and LASS with APOE are associated with human longevity and healthy aging. Aging Cell (): Jeong J., Juhn K., Lee H., Kim SH., Min BH., Lee KM., Cho MH., Park GH., Lee KH () SIRT promotes DNA repair activity and deacetylation of Ku. Exp Mol Med (): Kimura M., Gazitt Y., Cao X., Zhao X., Lansdorp PM., Aviv A () Synchrony of telomere length among hematopoietic cells. Exp Hematol (): Lamarche BJ., Orazio NI., Weitzman MD () The MRN complex in double-strand break repair and telomere maintenance. FEBS Lett (): Li R., Yang Y., An Y., Zhou Y., Liu Y., Yu Q., Lu D., Wang H., Jin L., Zhou W., Qian J., Shugart YY () Genetic polymorphisms in DNA double-strand break repair genes XRCC1, XRCC2 and susceptibility to hepatocellular carcinoma. Carcinogenesis (): Libby BJ, Reinholdt LG, Schimenti JC () Positional cloning and characterization of Mei1, a vertebrate-specific gene required for normal meiotic chromosome synapsis in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA (): Liu Y., Zhang H., Zhou K., Chen L., Xu Z., Zhong Y., Liu H., Li R., Shugart YY, Wei Q, Jin L, Huang F, Lu D and Zhou L () Tagging SNPs in non-homologous end-joining pathway genes and risk of glioma. Carcinogenesis (): Ludlow AT, Zimmerman JB, Witkowski S, Hearn JW, Hatfield BD and Roth SM () Relationship between physical activity level, telomere length and telomerase activity. Med Sci Sports Exerc (): Mather KA, Jorm AF, Parslow RA and Christensen H () Is telomere length a biomarker of aging