Heterozygosity plays a positive role in the attainment of longevity. Abstract: Genes involved in cardiovascular diseases (CVD) play an opposite role in human longevity. The alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) is a serine-protease inhibitor required for the prevention of proteolytic tissue damage by neutrophil elastase. The role of AAT in CVD has not been definitively assessed, and its effect on longevity has not yet been fully studied. To clarify these points, we have studied the distribution of AAT allele variants in three cohorts: 127 young patients affected by acute myocardial infarction (AMI), 255 young controls, and 143 centenarians from Sicily. The Z allele frequency was most frequent in centenarians (13.3%), intermediate in healthy young controls (3.1%), and less frequent in AMI patients (1.2%) (P = 0.0000001). The heterozygous MZ genotype was significantly overrepresented in centenarians (38/143) and underrepresented in AMI patients (3/127), with intermediate values in young controls (16/255) (P = 0.0000001). After adjustment for well-recognized AMI risk factors, the MZ genotype still predicted a significant negative risk factor for developing AMI in the Sicilian population. Thus, our data show a positive role of MZ heterozygosity in the attainment of successful aging linked to the positive effects of this genotype versus cardiovascular ischemic diseases.

F. List` G. Candore (&) M. P. Grimaldi D. Lio G. Colonna-Romano V. Orlando C. Caruso Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Metodologie Biomediche, Gruppo di Studio sullImmunosenescenza, Corso Tukory, Palermo, Italy e-mail: gcandore@unipa.it G. Paolisso Dipartimento di Medicina Geriatria e Malattie Metaboliche, II Universita` di Napoli, Napoli, Italy Centenarian offspring, who have an increased likelihood of surviving up to 100 years, show a reduced prevalence of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) and less frequency of cardiovascular risk. Istituto Nazionale di Riposo e Cura per Anziani, Ancona, Italy.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT), also referred to as an alpha-proteinase inhibitor (Pi), is a 52 kD glycoprotein secreted by hepatocytes and, to a lesser extent, by lung epithelial cells and phagocytes into the plasma at a concentration of 1.93.5 mg/ml. It is proposed to play an important role in protecting vulnerable elastic tissue in the lungs, gut, and vasculature from degradation by neutrophil elastase. Its severe deficiency is involved in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (De Meo and Silverman 2004; Lomas and Parfrey 2004; Luisetti and Seersholm 2004). The Pi gene, located on chromosome 14q32.1 (OMIM: 107400), is 12.2 Kb in length with seven exons and six introns. The encoded protein includes 394 amino acids with the active site of the enzyme inhibitor at methionine 358. It inhibits a variety of serine proteinases but its preferred target is neutrophil elastase that is bound to the active site and permanently inactivated (De Meo and Silverman).

A Danish study (Dahl et al.) found that ZZ AAT deficiency and MZ deficiency patients affected by coronary artery disease (CAD) have lower blood than MM/MS patients. Furthermore, heterozygosity was associated with reduced ischemic cerebrovascular disease (ICVD) CAD. The authors supposed that neutrophil can play a favorable role in CVD destroying elastic tissue of the arterial it alters the distensibility of the vessel wall, thus blood pressure and cardiac load. Since blood pressure is protective against ICVD CAD, AAT deficiency might be associated reduced risk of development of these diseases through this mechanism (Ooyama and 1995; Zureik et al. 2002; Dahl et al.). However, in that year, another report seemingly contrasting results (Talmud et al. 2003). In fact, the other authors demonstrated that the progression of atherosclerosis was with low AAT levels. They suggested elastase activity attributable to AAT deficiency accelerates hardening of arterial walls and (Talmud et al. 2003). However, analysis was very limited in scope and number (several dozens of patients), and mostly dealt.

More than 100 genetic variants of AAT have been identified, and these are strictly associated withCentenarians (Table 4). These results indicate that the MZ genotype is an independent negative risk factor for developing AMI in the male Sicilian population. Frequencies were tested for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) using the chi-squared test. Due to the different number of women in the groups under study, logistic regression analysis was performed only in men. We performed multiple logistic regression analysis to test the association of MZ genotype with AMI, taking into account smoking habits, family history of CAD, and the presence of type 2 diabetes, obesity, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and hypertriglyceridemia. The odds ratio (OR) (with CI) was calculated as an exponential of regression coefficient and its standard error. Results: Table 2 shows the frequency of AAT M, Z, S alleles in the groups under study. The Z allele frequency was highest in centenarians (13.3%), intermediate in healthy young controls (3.1%), and least frequent in AMI patients (1.2%) (P = 0.0000001). None of the Sicilian subjects were ZZ, SS homozygotes or SZ heterozygotes. The heterozygous MZ genotype was significantly overrepresented in centenarians (38/143) and underrepresented in AMI patients (3/127) with intermediate values in young controls (16/255) (Table 3, P = 0.0000001). All genotypes were in HWE. Discussion: The risk of CVD in patients with severe AAT deficiency has not been sufficiently investigated to formulate firm conclusions. There should be a theoretical association between aortic aneurysmal disease and AAT deficiency due to uninhibited elastase activity on the elastic tissue of arterial walls, but this has not been supported in published data nor has an association been shown with intracranial aneurysms (St Jean et al. 1996; Needham and Stockley 2004). However, elastin is a major component of vessel wall elastic lamina, and degradation of elastic fibers may be important in lowering blood pressure, which is a well-known risk factor for CVD and AMI. Increased elastase activity attributable to AAT deficiency has therefore been claimed to play a favorable role in CVD because destroying elastic tissue of the arterial wall alters the distensibility of the vessel wall, blood pressure, and cardiac load (Robert et al. 1998; Dahl et al. 2003). In fact, in a Danish study, the PI Z and PIMZ phenotypes have been associated with lower blood pressure in men, and PI MZ has been associated with a reduced risk of ICVD and CAD (Dahl et al. 2003). However, opposite results have been reported in another study (Talmud et al. 2003). The causes of the discrepancies are not clear, but the inclusion criteria, study populations, and measured endpoints differed substantially between the two studies (Dahl et al. 2003; Talmud et al. 2003). The most common alleles in Caucasoids are the M variants with allele frequencies greater than 0.95; the Z variant occurs with a frequency of 0.010.03 (de Serres et al. 2003; Lomas and Parfrey 2004). Therefore, according to Danish data, our results support a protective role for Z allele in CVD. Additionally, they show a positive role of MZ heterozygosity in attainment of successful aging likely linked to the positive effects of this genotype versus cardiovascular ischemic diseases. Concerning the meaning of our results, as previously discussed, better control of blood pressure in AAT deficiency has been proposed (Robert et al. 1998; Dahl et al. 2003). However, it has to be pointed out that the interaction of AAT with elastase results in the suicide cleavage of AAT. During this process, the C-terminal 36 amino acids (C-36) are cleaved off yet remain attached to the complex. This C-36 cleaved peptide is biologically active and increases low-density lipoprotein (LDL) binding and internalization, upregulates the LDL-receptor, induces cytokine and glutathione production. Thus, there is strong suggestive evidence that C-36 participates in inflammatory processes involved in atherogenesis. AAT deficiency could lead to fewer cleaved fragments of AAT in atherosclerotic plaques and thereby reduce atherosclerotic inflammation and deficiency: genetic aspects of alpha-antitrypsin deficiency: phenotypes and genetic modifiers of emphysema risk. Thorax: de Serres FJ, Blanco I, Fernandez-Bustillo E (2003) Genetic epidemiology of alpha-antitrypsin deficiency in southern EuropeC. Innate immunity and inflammation in aging: a key for understanding age-related diseases. Immun Ageing. Lio D, Candore G, Crivello A, Scola L, Colonna-Romano G, Cavallone L, Hoffman E, Caruso M, Licastro F, Caldarera CM, Branzi A, Franceschi C, Caruso C. Opposite effects of IL-common gene polymorphisms in cardiovascular diseases and in successful aging: the genetic background of male centenarians is protective against coronary heart disease. J Med Genet. Lomas DA, Parfrey H. Alpha-antitrypsin deficiency: molecular pathophysiology. Thorax. Luisetti M, Seersholm N. Alpha-antitrypsin deficiency: epidemiology of alpha-antitrypsin deficiency. Thorax. Marenberg ME, Risch N, Berkman LF, Floderus B, de Faire U. Genetic susceptibility to death from coronary heart disease in a study of twins. N Engl J Med. Miller SA, Dykes DD, Polesky HF. A simple salting-out procedure for extracting DNA from human nucleated cells. Nucleic Acid Res.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from the Italian Ministry of Education, University and Research to GC, DL, GCR, CC. Funds from the Italian Ministry of Health (Markers genetici di sindrome coronarica acuta e valutazione della L-arginina nella prevenzione di eventi ischemici) to CC and CF are also acknowledged. MPG is a PhD student at Pathobiology PhD course (directed by Prof. C.Caruso) of Palermo University and this work is in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the PhD.

References
Balistreri CR, Candore G, Colonna-Romano G, Lio D, Caruso M, Hoffman E, Franceschi C, Caruso C. Role of Toll-like receptor in acute myocardial infarction and longevity. JAMA. Bessenyei B, Marka M, Urban L, Zeher M, Semsei I. Single nucleotide polymorphisms: aging and diseases. Biogerontology. Candore G, Colonna-Romano G, Balistreri CR, Di Carlo D, Grimaldi MP, Listi F, Nuzzo D, Vasto S, Lio D, Caruso C. Biology of longevity: the role of the innate immune system. Rejuvenation Res. Candore G, Vasto S, Colonna-Romano G Lio D, Caruso M, Rea IM, Caruso C. Cytokine gene polymorphisms and atherosclerosis. In: Vandenbroeck K (ed) Cytokine gene polymorphisms in multifactorial conditions. ISBN: Florida, CRC press Caruso C, Candore G, Cavallone L, Colonna-Romano G, Scola L, Hoffman E, Caruso M, Franceschi C, Lio D. Genetic background of centenarians may be protective against cardiovascular diseases. International Congress of Immunology ISBN/ISSN: Caruso C, Candore G, Colonna-Romano G, Lio D, Franceschi C. Inflammation and lifespan. Science. Cox DW. Alpha-antitrypsin deficiency. In: Scriver C, Beaudet A, Sly W, Valle D (eds) The metabolic and molecular bases of inherited disease  th edn. McGraw-Hill New York p Dahl M, Tybjaerg-Hansen A, Sillesen H, Jensen G Steffensen R Nordestgaard BG Blood Pressure risk of ischemic cerebrovascular and ischemic heart disease, and longevity in alpha-antitrypsin deficiency. Circulation. Miller SA, Dykes DD, Polesky HF. A simple salting-out procedure for extracting DNA from human nucleated cells. Nucleic Acid Res. Nieminen MS, Kesaniemi YA, Pasternack A, Humphries SE, Syvanne M. Progression of atherosclerosis is associated with variation in the alpha-antitrypsin gene. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. Tazelaar JP, Friedman KJ, Kline RS, Guthrie ML, Farber RA. Detection of alpha-antitrypsin Z and S mutations by polymerase chain reaction-mediated site-directed mutagenesis. Clin Chem. Terry DF, Wilcox M, McCormick MA, Lawler E, Perls TT. Cardiovascular advantages among the offspring of centenarians. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. Zureik M, Robert L, Courbon D. Serum elastase activity, serum elastase inhibitors, and occurrence of carotid