elderly populations.

Genotype profiles of loci encoding DNA repair enzymes were compared between a cohort of newborns (n=290) and retired individuals (average age at sampling 70.02 years; n=430) to identify potential associations with longevity. Seven polymorphisms at four loci involved in DNA repair were analyzed, but no differences in genotype frequencies at the four SNP loci were observed, indicating no evidence of association with longevity in this population. However, significant differences in frequency of certain repeat sizes at three microsatellite loci were detected, but since there is no known functional consequence of these repeat lengths, the action of selection cannot yet be ascribed.

Over 400 polymorphisms have been identified in 80 genes that have been screened for variation, and non-synonymous polymorphisms can have functional consequences that could alter the ability to repair DNA damage. Our genetic material is under continual assault from extrinsic genotoxic agents and intrinsic metabolic processes, and as people age, they will have to contend with a lifetime of increasing exposure to DNA-damaging agents. To cope with this barrage of DNA damage, there are a number of DNA repair pathways that are responsible for its detection and repair. Over 115 genes so far have a recognized role in DNA damage recognition and repair, and exposure to DNA-damaging agents is reflected in age-related increases in somatic mutations in both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA and in chromosomal translocations.

The study populations consisted of umbilical cord blood samples from an unselected newborn population (n=290) and retired male radiation workers previously employed at the Sellafield nuclear facility (n=430). Genotyping analysis was conducted on seven polymorphisms in four DNA repair genes: 2 SNPs and 1 microsatellite in XRCC1 of the BER pathway, 1 SNP and 1 microsatellite within XRCC3 of the HR pathway, 1 SNP in XRCC4 and 1 microsatellite in XRCC5, both components of the NHEJ pathway. All four SNP polymorphisms were found to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Comparison of newborn and retired worker genotype frequencies at the 4 SNP loci was undertaken using v2 analysis, and there was no evidence for differing gene frequencies between the newborn cohort and the retired worker population.

In conclusion, no evidence of association with longevity was observed in this population based on genotype frequencies at the four SNP loci analyzed. Significant differences in frequency of certain repeat sizes at three microsatellite loci were detected, but the action of selection cannot yet be ascribed. These findings contribute to our understanding of DNA repair pathways and their role in aging and disease susceptibility.The text appears to be a table and some statistical data. There are no obvious spelling or grammar errors to correct. However, some tables and figures are missing in the text. It is difficult to improve readability without the full context of the study.JP (2012) Endogenous DNA damage and mutation. Trends Genet: 
Mohrenweiser HW, Wilson DM, and Jones IM (2003) Challenges and complexities in estimating both the functional impact and the disease risk associated with the extensive genetic variation in human DNA repair genes. Mutation Research:
De Benedictis G, Carotenuto L, Carrieri G, Luca MDe, Falcone E, Rose G, Cavalcanti S, Corsonello F, Feraco E, Baggio G, Bertolini S, Mari D, Mattace R, Yashin AI, Bonafe M and Franceschi C (1999) Gene/longevity association studies at four autosomal loci (REN, THO, PARP, SOD). Eur J Hum Genet:
De Benedictis G, Tan Q, Jeune B, Christensen K, Ukraintseva SV, Bonafe M, Franceschi C, Vaupel JW and Yashin AI (2001) Recent advances in human gene-longevity association studies. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development:
Goode EL, Ulrich CM and Potter JD (2002) Polymorphisms in DNA repair genes and associations with cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention:
Hasty P (2005) The impact of DNA damage, genetic mutation and cellular responses on cancer prevention, longevity and aging: observations in humans and mice. Mechanisms of Ageing and Development:
Hasty P, Campisi J, Hoeijmakers JHJ et al. (2003) Aging and genome maintenance: lessons from the mouse? Science:
Hochberg Y (1988) A sharper Bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of significance. Biometrika:
Hoeijmakers JHJ (2001) Genome maintenance mechanisms for preventing cancer. Nature:
Jones IM et al. (2000) Three somatic genetic biomarkers and covariates in radiation-exposed Russian cleanup workers of the Chernobyl nuclear accident. Mutation Research:
Morley A (2002) Somatic mutation and ageing. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences:
Muiras ML, Muller M, Schachter F, and Burkle A (2001) Increased poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase activity in lymphoblastoid cell lines from centenarians. Journal of Molecular Medicine:
Neri S, Cattini L, Facchini A, Pawelec G and Mariani E (2002) Microsatellite instability in in vitro ageing of T lymphocyte clones. Experimental Gerontology:
Pesch B, Dusing R, Rabstein S, Harth V, Grentrup D, Bruning T, Landt O, Vetter H and Ko YD (2002) Polymorphic metabolic susceptibility genes and longevity: a study in octogenarians. Toxicology Letters:
Price EA et al. (2000) Rare microsatellite polymorphisms in the DNA repair genes XRCC1, XRCC3 and XRCC4 associated with cancer in patients of varying radiosensitivity. Somatic Cell and Molecular Genetics:
Ramsey MJ et al. (1995) The effects of age and lifestyle factors on the accumulation of cytogenetic damage as measured by chromosome painting. Mutation Research:
Relton CL et al. (1999) DNA repair gene polymorphisms, prenatal factors and the frequency of somatic mutations in the glycophorin-A gene among healthy newborns. Mutation Research:
Ruttan CC and Glickman BW (1999) Coding variants in human double-strand break DNA repair genes. Mutation Research:
Savas S et al. (2003) Identifying functional genetic variants in DNA repair pathway using protein conservation analysis. Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention:
Shen MR, Jones IM and Mohrenweiser H (1998) Nonconservative amino acid substitution variants exist at polymorphic frequency in DNA repair genes in healthy humans. Cancer Research:
Slupphaug G, Kavli B and Krokan HE (2003) The interacting pathways for prevention and repair of oxidative DNA damage. Mutation Research:
Taioli E et al. (2001) Polymorphisms of drug-metabolizing enzymes in healthy nonagenarians and centenarians: difference at GSTT1 locus. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications:
Takanami T, Nakamura J, Kubota Y, and Horiuchi S (1999) The Arg194His polymorphism in X-ray repair cross-complementing gene 1 impairs DNA repair ability. Mutation Research:
Tawn EJ et al. (1999) FISH chromosome aberration analysis on retired radiation workers from the Sellafield nuclear facility. Radiation Research:
Vijg J (2000) Somatic mutations and aging: a re-evaluation. Mutation Research:
Wilding CS