Common polymorphisms in nitric oxide synthase (NOS) genes influence the quality of aging and longevity in humans. Alberto Montesanto, Paolina Crocco, Federica Tallaro, Francesca Pisani, Bruno Mazzei, Vincenzo Mari, Andrea Corsonello, Fabrizia Lattanzio, Giuseppe Passarino and Giuseppina Rose conducted a study of 763 individuals aged 19-107 years to examine the variability of three human genes (NOS1, NOS2, NOS3) responsible for NO synthesis. Their study aimed to determine if gene variation in NOS genes was associated with longevity and geriatric parameters. The results showed that NOS1 and NOS2 were associated with longevity. Additionally, NOS1 rs1879417 was associated with lower cognitive performance while NOS2 rs2297518 polymorphism was associated with physical performance. SNPs in the NOS1 and NOS3 genes were also found to be respectively associated with depression symptoms and disability, two factors affecting quality of life in older individuals. Overall, the study showed that genetic variability of NOS genes has an effect on common age-related phenotypes and longevity in humans as well as previously reported for model organisms. 

Nitric oxide (NO) is a signaling molecule that interacts with different intracellular targets to trigger multiple signal transduction pathways. It contributes to the control of almost every cellular function. NO is produced by NADPH-dependent enzymes named NO synthases (NOS), encoded by three distinct NOS genes named neuronal (nNOS or NOS1), inducible (iNOS or NOS2), and endothelial (eNOS or NOS3). Although all isoforms share a similar function, their modes of action are quite different. While NOS1 and NOS3 are constitutively expressed and Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent, the inducible form (NOS2) is induced by inflammatory stimuli and is Ca2+/calmodulin-independent. Although all three isoforms can be found in numerous tissues, the specific cell type where NOS enzymes are located determines the specific outcomes of the NO signaling pathways.

NO produced by NOS1 functions as a regulator of neuronal transmission, cerebral blood flow and synaptic plasticity thus acting as a neuromodulator and neuroprotective agent. In endothelial cells, NO mainly produced by NOS3 acts as a regulator of vascular homeostasis being involved in the regulation of smooth muscle relaxation and in the inhibition of platelet aggregation. NO produced by NOS2 particularly in macrophages is mainly involved in the maintenance of the immune-inflammatory response. The biological effects of NO largely depend on the amount of NO produced. High amounts of NO or its derivative reactive nitrogen species (RNS) can trigger nitrosative modifications of proteins, lipids and nucleic acids, which may lead to cytotoxicity, neurodegeneration, and apoptotic cell death.

Supportive evidence for a role of NOSs in healthy aging and lifespan extension has come from studies with knockout models. In mice lacking all three NOS isoforms, the survival rate is reduced by 80%. Moreover, a reduction in survival rate of about 50%, and an attenuation of caloric restriction-induced life extension has been observed in nos3 knockout mice.

The study analyzed common and potentially functional NOS SNPs in a sample group of 763 individuals ranging from 19 to 107 years old. The sample was collected during several campaigns of recruitment. Subjects with dementia and/or neurological disorders were not included. The variability of genes that were tested for association with longevity was also investigated in relation to accepted biomarkers of the aging process that evaluate physical, cognitive, and psychological status in the elderly population. The management of activities of daily living, physical performance and cognitive function were assessed. 

All the subjects gave their written informed consent to use their anonymous genetic and phenotypic data for genetic studies on aging and longevity. The recruitment campaigns received the approval of the Ethical committee of the University of Calabria.Values used in the analyses were corrected for age, sex, and height since hand grip strength (HG) is affected by these factors. The reason for a test not being carried out was specified, whether due to physical disabilities or refusal to participate. SNPs were selected based on minor allele frequency (MAF) [10% in Caucasians], putative functional significance (non-synonymous SNPs, SNPs located in the 50- and 30-UTR regions), and SNPs previously investigated in association studies. The selected SNPs for each gene are reported in Table 1.

The Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) was used to measure depression in the elderly. A score above five suggests moderate depression, while a score above ten suggests severe depression. GDS scores were dichotomized as one if the subject showed depression symptoms (GDS [5) and zero otherwise.

Regression models were applied to estimate how the variability of genes analyzed influences the predisposition to human longevity and functional parameters including cognitive function, functional performance, and depression status. In the regression models, sex was used as a covariate when testing the association between the variability of analyzed genes and human longevity. Covariate adjustment included sex, age, and height when analyzing HG scores, only age and sex when investigating disability and depression status. MMSE scores were normalized for age and educational status according to a standardized procedure reported in Grigoletto et al. (1999).

The Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) test was used to evaluate cognitive performance. MMSE scores were dichotomized as 1 if the subject showed normal cognitive function (MMSE C 23) and zero otherwise.

The Model-based multifactor dimensionality reduction (MB-MDR) algorithm was applied to explore interaction effects between analyzed polymorphisms on phenotypes.

For each polymorphism of the NOS genes, allele frequencies were estimated by counting genes from observed genotypes. The Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) was tested using the exact test proposed by Wigginton et al. (2005). Pairwise measures of linkage disequilibrium (LD) between the analyzed loci were calculated with Haploview 4.2 (Barrett et al. 2005). The amount of LD was quantified by Lewontin's coefficient (D0).

Table 2 summarizes the main characteristics of the analyzed sample stratified by age-group as previously defined. Supplementary Table 1 shows the genotype frequencies in cases and controls. All SNPs followed HWE in the control group (p [0.05). No linkage disequilibrium was detected at any of the loci.

The RobustSNP algorithm was adopted to test the association between the analyzed phenotypes and NOS genes' variability. Different genetic models (dominant, additive, and recessive) were used to test the association using for each SNP the minor allele as reference. Table 3 shows results obtained using the RobustSNP algorithm. The NOS1 rs1879417 and NOS2 rs2297518 were significantly associated with longevity after adjusting for sex. The additive model for rs1879417 and the recessive one for rs2297518 resulted to be the most likely genetic models in which the presence of relevant alleles decreases the probability to attain longevity.

The variability of NOS genes affects common age-related phenotypes and longevity. NOS1 rs1879417-C allele was associated with a lower probability of survival to very old age and lower cognitive performance (MMSE score \ 23). This association is in line with several evidences. First, it is well established that nitrosative stress is a significant causal factor in physiological decline characterizing aging in many tissues. Second, age-related alterations in nitric oxide synthase activity and/or expression and the consequent alterations in NO production and bioactivity contribute to this decline.The glutamate-NO/cGMP pathway plays a role in learning and memory processes, cognitive performance during aging, and depression (Domek-opacinska and Strosznajder 2010; Paul and Ekamba-ram 2011). Recent studies indicate that nos1 knockout mice have impaired cognitive functions (Kirchner et al. 2004; Weitzdoerfer et al. 2004; Zoubovsky et al. 2011). Changes in the expression and/or activity of NOS1 have been observed, suggesting that the NOS2/NO/ONOO overproduction induced by TNFa via NF-jB may be one of the underlying causes of sarcopenia (Hall et al. 2011). Our finding that the rs2297518-A allele, which reduces the chance of survival to very old age, is associated with higher HG scores seems somewhat in contrast with the idea that higher HG strength predicts increased survival in the elderly population. This result is weakly significant and needs to be verified. On the other hand, it may reflect pleiotropic contrasting effects and functions of iNOS NO in different cell types. In this view, it can be hypothesized that the possible harmful effect exerted by the rs2297518-A allele in some cell types (for instance, low NO production in macrophages) is more relevant for some phenotypes than for others.

For two of the six variants analyzed, we found an association with geriatric conditions but not with longevity. Specifically, the SNP rs2682826 in the NOS1 gene and the SNP rs10277237 in the NOS3 gene were respectively associated with GDS (p = 0.015; p = 0.033) and Activity of Daily Living (p = 0.002; p = 0.004), two of the main factors affecting quality of life in older individuals. Depression is a complex disorder where inflammation, oxidative/nitrosative stress, and reduced hippocampal neurogenesis contribute substantially (Maes et al. 2009). It has been found that NOS1-derived NO negatively affects neurogenesis and that the overexpression of NOS1 in the hippocampus following chronic mild stress exposure suppresses hippocampal neurogenesis and induces depression (Zhou et al. 2007). We found that carriers of the minor rs2682826-T allele have a higher probability of being depressed. In line with our observation, the rs2682826-T allele has been found to be a susceptibility factor for recurrent depressive disorder and for traits where depression is a comorbidity factor such as Parkinson disease (Gaecki et al. 2011; Hancock et al. 2008). The rs2682826 is located in the 3'UTR of exon 29, downstream from the translation termination site of NOS1 (C276T). Differences in protein production elicited by this variation, which lies close to several miRNA binding sites (Ibarrola-Villava et al. 2011), could be at the basis of the observed association.

Another interesting finding of our study was the association between the NOS3 rs10277237 and ADL scores. Subjects homozygous for the rs10277237-A allele had significantly better ADL performance compared with subjects with the other two genotypes. The inability of older adults to perform basic self-care independently is a consequence of a decline in physiological functions of multiple tissues. A contributor to this general decay is likely to be the reduction in endothelial cell function caused by the age-related impairment in the release of NO by NOS3. This reduces blood flow to all tissues in the body and thus the availability of nutrients for energy needs. Age-related changes in energy production and fuel utilization via mitochondrial dysfunction may also contribute to the decline in physical performance and disability among older adults. In this context, it is worth noting that recent studies have reported the existence of a mitochondrial NOS (mtNOS) isoform that seems to be both constitutive, mainly a post-translational isoform of NOS1, and inducible (Elfering et al. 2000; Lopez et al. 2006; Finocchietto et al. 2009). Because of its action on complex I and IV, NO in mitochondria may have important effects on oxidative phosphorylation and ROS/RNS production (Finocchietto et al. 2009). These effects may be amplified in a pro-oxidant environment such as in the case of aged individuals, with consequences particularly in tissues such as the brain and skeletal muscle, which are highly dependent on mitochondrial function.

Causative genetic variations in LD with the studied SNPs remain to be identified, and the associations between NOS alleles and aging phenotypes we observed would not hold after Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.Hibbeln J, Perini G, Kubera M, Bob P, Lerer B, Maj M () The inflammatory and neurodegenerative (I&ND) hypothesis of depression: leads for future research and new drug developments in depression. Metab Brain Dis: 

Mann SM, Licinio J, Wong ML, Yu WH, Karanth S, Rettori V () The nitric oxide hypothesis of aging. Exp Gerontol: 

Moilanen E, Moilanen T, Knowles R, Charles I, Kadoya Y, Al-Saffar N, Revell PA, Moncada S () Nitric oxide synthase is expressed in human macrophages during foreign body inflammation. Am J Pathol: 

Moncada S, Higgs EA () The discovery of nitric oxide and its role in vascular biology. Br J Pharmacol:S

Montesanto A, Lagani V, Martino C, Dato S, De Rango F, Berardelli M, Corsonello A, Mazzei B, Mari V, Lattanzio F, Conforti D, Passarino G () A novel population-specific approach to define frailty. Age (Dordr):

Napoli C, Ignarro LJ () Nitric oxide and pathogenic mechanisms involved in the development of vascular diseases. Arch Pharm Res: 

Nisoli E, Clementi E, Paolucci C, Cozzi V, Tonello C, Sciorati C, Bracale R, Valerio A, Francolini M, Moncada S, Car ruba MO () Mitochondrial biogenesis in mammals: the role of endogenous nitric oxide. Science: 

Nisoli E, Tonello C, Cardile A, Cozzi V, Bracale R,Tedesco L,Falcone S, Valerio A, Cantoni O, Clementi E, Moncada S, Carruba MO () Calorie restriction promotes mitochondrial biogenesis by inducing the expression of OS. Science: 

Oess S, Icking A, Fulton D, Govers R, Muller-Esterl W () Subcellular targeting and trafficking of nitric oxide synthases. Biochem J: 

Pacher P, Beckman JS, Liaudet L () Nitric oxide and peroxynitrite in health and disease. Physiol Rev: 

Passarino G, Montesanto A, Dato S, Giordano S, Domma F, Mari V,Feraco E, De Benedictis G () Sex and age specificity of susceptibility genes modulating survival at old age. Hum Hered: 

Paul V, Ekambaram P () Involvement of nitric oxide in learning and memory processes. Indian J Med Res: 

Reif A, Grunblatt E, Herterich S,Wichart I,Rainer MK,Jungwirth S,Danielczyk W,Deckert J,Tragl KH,Riederer P () The neuronal nitric oxide synthase gene is critically involved in neuroprotection against manganese-induced toxicity. Neurobiol Dis:

Ibarrola-Villava M,Pena-Chilet M,Fernandez LP,Aviles JA,Mayor M,Martin-Gonzalez M,Gomez-Fernandez C,Casado B,Lazaro P,Lluch A,Benitez J,
Lozoya R,Boldo E,Pizarro A,Martinez-Cadenas C,Ribas G () Genetic polymorphisms in DNA repair and oxidative stress pathways associated with malignant melanoma susceptibility. Eur J Cancer: 

Jung J, Na C,Huh Y () Alterations in nitric oxide synthase in the aged CNS. Oxid Med Cell Longev: 

Kader KN, Akella R, Ziats NP, Lakey LA, Harasaki H, Ranieri JP, Bellamkonda RV () OS-overexpressing endothelial cells inhibit platelet aggregation and smooth muscle cell proliferation in vitro. Tissue Eng: 

Kanski J, Hong SJ, Schoneich C () Proteomic analysis of protein nitration in aging skeletal muscle and identification of nitrotyrosine-containing sequences in vivo by nano-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry. J Biol Chem: 

Katz S, Downs TD, Cash HR, Grotz RC () Progress in development of the index of ADL. Gerontologist: 

Kawamoto EM,Vasconcelos AR,Degaspari S,Bohmer AE,Scavone C et al () Age-related changes in nitric oxide activity, cyclic GMP, and TBARS levels in platelets and erythrocytes reflect the oxidative status in central nervous system. Age (Dordr):

Kim CH,Zou Y,Kim DH,Kim ND,Yu