Polymorphisms in the superoxide dismutase gene reveal no association with human longevity in Germans: a case-control association study. Liljana Gentschew, Friederike Flachsbart, Rabea Kleindorp, Nandini Badarinarayan, Stefan Schreiber, and Almut Nebel tested 19 SNPs in their collection of 1,612 long-lived individuals (centenarians and nonagenarians) and 1,104 younger controls. They also intended to replicate the previous association of the SOD2 SNP rs4880 with longevity observed in a Danish cohort. In their study, no association was detected between the tested SNPs and the longevity phenotype, neither in the entire long-lived sample set nor in the centenarian subgroup analysis. Their results suggest that sequence variation in the SOD genes does not considerably influence human longevity in Germans. The role of SODs in aging and oxidative stress regulation has been widely studied. There is growing evidence that imbalances in these processes influence lifespan in several species.

In humans, genetic polymorphisms in SOD genes may play an important role in the development of age-related diseases. Genetic variation in SOD2 is thought to be associated with longevity. These observations prompted Gentschew et al. to perform a case-control association study using a comprehensive haplotype tagging approach for the three SOD genes (SOD1, SOD2, SOD3) by testing a total of 19 SNPs in their extensive German longevity sample. In addition, they tested the finding for the SOD2 SNP rs4880 in their extended sample set because of the previously observed inconsistent association results with old age.

The accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) causes the alteration of physical or cognitive functions with aging. To date, most of the research on longevity supports this hypothesis. However, some studies have shown that a moderate level of oxidative stress might have positive effects on lifespan as put forward by the hormesis hypothesis. High levels of ROS are responsible for the onset of various common diseases that are associated with a decreased lifespan including hypertension, atherosclerosis, type 2 diabetes, cancer, and Alzheimer's disease. It is possible that long-lived individuals carry beneficial genetic variants in longevity-assurance genes that are involved in stress response signaling or help to protect against oxidative damage caused by free radicals.

Superoxide dismutases (SODs) are one class of molecules with antioxidant properties that remove superoxide from organisms by catalyzing the dismutation of the superoxide radical to hydrogen peroxide. They are a central player in the redox biology of cells and tissues and represent an important endogenous antioxidant defense and signaling system that protects cells from free radicals.

In mammalian cells, three SOD genes have been identified that all have specific functions and cellular distributions: the cytoplasmic copper-zinc SOD1 (CuZnSOD), the mitochondrial SOD2 (MnSOD) and extracellular SOD3 (EC SOD). An overexpression of SOD2 in adult Drosophila melanogaster resulted in an increased lifespan that is proportional to the increased expression of the enzyme. Similar effects were observed in mice overexpressing SOD2 or SOD1, whereas mice with conditional SOD2 deficiency in fibroblasts showed a reduced lifespan and premature onset of age-related phenotypes such as weight loss, skin atrophy, osteoporosis, and muscle degeneration. Mice deficient in SOD3 also displayed a shorter life.

In humans, genetic polymorphisms in the three SOD genes may play an important role in the development of age-related diseases and longevity. The most widely studied SOD single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs4880 is located in the SOD2 gene and results in a T [ C substitution causing an amino acid substitution from valine to alanine. The association results for that SNP are inconsistent. It was found that individuals carrying the T allele have an increased risk for cardiomyopathy, atherosclerosis, coronary heart disease, diabetes mellitus, and lung cancer. Other studies have shown that the C allele is more common in patients with breast cancer, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, gastric cancer, and prostate cancer. However, Soerensen et al. indicated that the C allele of rs4880 is significantly associated with decreased mortality in a longitudinal study of 1,650 LLI (age at intake: 92-93 years) from the Danish 1905 cohort. A previous study showed an increased frequency of the T allele in older Ashkenazi male subjects (75 years) compared to younger controls (22 years). Other case-control studies did not show an association between rs4880 and longevity.

Allele-based single marker case-control analyses (CCA) and odds ratio (OR) statistics were calculated with v2 statistics using the open-source analysis toolset PL(http://www.broad.mit.edu/mpg/haploview/) (Barrett et al., 2005) was used to check for any misspelled words in the text before it was included in the analysis (p [HWE 0.001). Haploview was also utilized to select tagging SNPs based on the HapMap genotypes of Europeans with pairwise tagging option (pairwise r2 C 0.8). It was also used to calculate linkage disequilibrium (LD) based on the measure r2 between each marker pair, for visualizing LD plots and for conducting haplotype association analyses. The analysis involved a total of 1,612 unrelated German study subjects who had exceptional age (age range: 95-109 years, mean age: 98.8 years), including 748 centenarians (mean age: 101.3 years). The gender ratio was 75% females versus 25% males. At the time of recruitment, 1,104 German control subjects were between 60 and 75 years old (mean age: 66.9 years). All controls matched the LLI by ancestry, gender, and geographical origin within the country. A detailed description of the samples and the recruitment procedure is reported elsewhere (Nebel et al., 2005). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Ethical approval was obtained by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of the Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel.

Results

SNP genotyping

The entire sample set of 1,612 German LLI, a subset of 748 centenarians and the control group of 1,104 younger individuals were subjected to a gender-matched case-control analysis of 19 SNPs located in the SOD1, SOD2 and SOD3 genes. All SNPs were found to be in HWE in both the cases and controls. No association was observed between the tested SNPs and the longevity phenotype, neither in the whole LLI sample (1,612 cases and 1,104 controls) (Supplementary Table 2) nor in the centenarian subgroup (748 cases and 1,104 controls) (Table 1) or in a gender-specific analysis (Supplementary Table 3a, b). In the female centenarian subset, one SNP (rs8031) reached nominal significance (p = 0.035), which disappeared after correction for multiple testing (Supplementary Table 3b). Hence, we did not replicate the significant association found for rs4880 (Soerensen et al., 2009; Stessman et al., 2005).

Genotyping for 19 SNPs located in the SOD1, SOD2 and SOD3 gene regions were carried out by the iPLEX Mass ARRAY technology (Sequenom, San Diego, CA), the SNPlex Genotyping System (Life Technologies Corporation, Foster City, CA), and the ABI TaqMan technology (Life Technologies Corporation, Foster City, CA). Of the 19 analyzed markers, three are located in the SOD1 gene, eight in SOD2 and eight in SOD3. The selected SOD SNPs with previously described findings are listed in Supplementary Table 1 together with an overview of the complete marker set. The set consisted of an informative panel of SNPs selected through a haplotype tagging approach (based on the HapMap genotypes of Europeans with pairwise tagging option; pairwise et al., 2009; Deelen et al., 2011; Flachsbart et al., 2009; Li et al., 2009; Nebel et al., 2011; Pawlikowska et al., 2009; Schachter et al., 1994; Soerensen et al., 2010; Willcox et al., 2008). Both genes were identified by candidate gene association studies. A number of investigations were already performed on a genome-wide scale to uncover, in a hypothesis-free manner, common genetic variants that are involved in human longevity (Deelen et al., 2011; Nebel et al., 2011; Newman et al., 2010; Walter et al., 2011). However, beside APOE, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) failed to identify any additional susceptibility genes with genome-wide significance for this trait. Apparently, the influence of common genetic variation on longevity is rather modest which cannot be detected by GWAS (Deelen et al., 2011). Therefore, GWAS provide only limited statistical power as multiple testing for more than a million markers has to be taken into account. This means that candidate gene studies are still powerful tools for detecting new longevity variants.

Eighteen of the 19 analyzed SNPs form four haplotype blocks, where block 1 comprises three markers in SOD1The search for replication findings represents one of the major challenges in human longevity research. Replication failures could be due to different sample sizes and age ranges used for case and control groups, which hamper validation of association results. Associations may also be population-specific, as observed for rs4880 in several populations. For example, the Jewish sample (Stessman et al. 2005) was much smaller and younger than the German study group and represented a different ethnicity. Even though the German and Danish populations are quite similar in sample size, age range, and ethnicity, the Danish study was prospective, which might explain the different results in our retrospective case-control analysis. Furthermore, varying sets of interacting genetic and environmental factors might induce population-specific effects (Caliebe et al. 2010).

Neither the entire LLI sample nor the centenarian subgroup showed a significant association between the tested SNPs or haplotypes and the longevity phenotype. By tagging an informative subset of common variants and considering haplotype differences, comprehensive information about common SNPs and haplotypes was covered. Additionally, it should be possible to obtain statistical evidence for the effects of rare variants that are captured by one of the common haplotypes (Lin et al. 2004). The possibility that our negative association finding results from population stratification in our sample is unlikely.

For the human longevity phenotype, it is well known that most common genetic variants are likely to have only small to moderate effects (Christensen et al. 2006; Deelen et al. 2011; Nebel et al. 2011; Newman Barrett JC, Fry B, Maller J, Daly MJ ( ) Haploview: analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype maps. Bioinformatics: Bell JT, Tsai PC, Yang TP, Pidsley R, Nisbet J, Glass D, Mangino M, Zhai G, Zhang F, Valdes A, Shin SY, Dempster EL, Murray RM, Grundberg E, Hedman AK, Nica A, Small KS, Dermitzakis ET, McCarthy MI, Mill J, Spector TD, Deloukas P ( ) Epigenome-wide scans identify differentially methylated regions for age and age-related phenotypes in a healthy ageing population. PLoS Genet: e doi:/journal.pgen. Benzi G, Moretti A ( ) Are reactive oxygen species involved in Alzheimer's disease? Neurobiol Aging: Bokov A, Chaudhuri A, Richardson A ( ) The role of oxidative damage and stress in aging. Mech Ageing Dev: Brioukhanov AL, Netrusov AI, Eggen RI ( ) The catalase and superoxide dismutase genes are transcriptionally up-regulated upon oxidative stress in the strictly anaerobic archaeon Methanosarcina barkeri. Microbiology: Brunet A, Sweeney LB, Sturgill JF, Chua KF, Greer PL, Lin Y, Tran H, Ross SE, Mostoslavsky R, Cohen HY, Hu LS, Cheng HL, Jedrychowski MP, Gygi SP, Sinclair DA, Alt FW, Greenberg ME ( ) Stress-dependent regulation of FOXO transcription factors by the SIRT deacetylase. Science: Budovsky A, Craig T, Wang J, Tacutu R, Csordas A, Lourenco J, Fraifeld VE, de Magalhaes JP ( ) Longevitap: a database of human genetic variants associated with longevity. Trends Genet. doi:/j.tig.

Compared to the effects of genetic components on human longevity determinants of lifespan differences have not yet been identified (Deelen et al. 2013). Environmental factors appear to be one of the major determinants of human longevity. The number of novel genetic findings contributing to human longevity is limited, highlighting the need for a large sample size to detect longevity variants. Meta-analyses can also be performed to identify candidate genes with modest influence. Alternative approaches, such as investigating structural variation, gene-gene interactions, or epigenetic mechanisms (e.g., miRNA, methylation patterns), are likely to improve our understanding of the interplay of the various genetic and environmental factors that influence human longevity (Bell et al. 2012; Christensen et al. 2006; Collino et al. 2013; ElSharawy et al. 2012; Gentilini et al. 2012; Glessner et al. 2013; Heyn et al. 2012; Kuningas et al. 2011; Sebastiani et al. 2011; Tan et al. 2002).

Acknowledgments: This study was funded by the DFG Excellence Cluster Inflammation at Interfaces, the INTERREG 4 A program SyddanmarkSorry, there seems to be no text enclosed in ``` ``` for me to process. Please provide the text for me to work on.Lesueur-Ginot L, Cohen D (2008) Genetic associations with human longevity at the APOE and ACE loci. Nat Genet: 
Schoenhofen EA, Wyszynski DF, Andersen S, Pennington J, Young R, Terry DF, Perls TT (2010) Characteristics of supercentenarians. J Am Geriatr Soc: 
Sebastiani P, Perls TT (2012) The genetics of extreme longevity: lessons from the New England centenarian study. Front Genet: 
Sebastiani P, Riva A, Montano M, Pham P, Torkamani A, Scherba E, Benson G, Milton JN, Baldwin CT, Andersen S, Schork NJ, Steinberg MH, Perls TT (2017) Whole genome sequences of a male and female supercentenarian, ages greater than years. Front Genet: 
Shimoda-Matsubayashi S, Matsumine H, Kobayashi T, Nakagawa-Hattori Y, Shimizu Y, Mizuno Y (1998) Structural dimorphism in the mitochondrial targeting sequence in the human manganese superoxide dismutase gene. A predictive evidence for conformational change to influence mitochondrial transport and a study of allelic association in Parkinson's disease. Biochem Biophys Res Commun: 
Skytthe A, Pedersen NL, Kaprio J, Stazi MA, Hjelmborg JV, Iachine I, Vaupel JW, Christensen K (2006) Longevity studies in GenoUtwin. Twin Res: 
Soerensen M, Christensen K, Stevnsner T, Christiansen L (2009) The Mn-superoxide dismutase single nucleotide polymorphism rs and the glutathione peroxidase single nucleotide polymorphism rs are associated with aging and longevity in the oldest old. Mech Ageing Dev: 
Orr WC, Sohal RS (1994) Extension of lifespan by overexpression of superoxide dismutase and catalase in Drosophila melanogaster. Science: 
Paolisso G, Tagliamonte MR, Rizzo MR, Manzella D, Gambardella A, Varricchio M (1998) Oxidative stress and advancing age: results in healthy centenarians. J Am Geriatr Soc: 
Pawlikowska L, Hu D, Huntsman S, Sung A, Chu C, Chen J, Joyner AH, Schork NJ, Hsueh WC, Reiner AP, Psaty BM, Atzmon G, Barzilai N, Cummings SR, Browner WS, Kwok PY, Ziv E (2009) Association of common genetic variation in the insulin/IGF signaling pathway with human longevity. Aging Cell: 
Perls T, Kunkel LM, Puca AA (2002) The genetics of exceptional human longevity. J Mol Neurosci: 
Phillips JP, Campbell SD, Michaud D, Charbonneau M, Hilliker AJ (1989) Null mutation of copper/zinc superoxide dismutase in Drosophila confers hypersensitivity to paraquat and reduced longevity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA: 
Rattan SI (2008) Targeting the age-related occurrence, removal and accumulation of molecular damage by hormesis. Ann NY Acad Sci: 
Rattan SI, Demirovic D (2010) Hormesis can and does work in humans. Dose Response: 
Ristow M, Zarse K (2010) How increased oxidative stress promotes longevity and metabolic health: the concept of mitochondrial hormesis (mitohormesis). Exp Gerontol: 
Newman AB, Walter S, Lunetta KL, Garcia ME, Slagboom PE, Christensen K, Arnold AM, Aspelund T, Aulchenko YS, Benjamin EJ, Christiansen L, DAgostino RB Sr, Fitzpatrick AL, Franceschini N, Glazer NL, Gudnason V, Hofman A, Kaplan R, Karasik D, Kelly-Hayes M, Kiel DP, Launer LJ, Marciante KD, Massaro JM, Miljkovic I, Nalls MA, Hernandez D, Psaty BM, Rivadeneira F, Rotter J, Seshadri S, Smith AV, Taylor KD, Tiemeier H, Uh HW, Uitterlinden AG Vaupel JW Walston J Westendorp RG Harris TB Lumley T van Duijn CM Murabito JM (2010) A meta-analysis of four genome-wide association studies of survival to age years or older: the cohorts for heart and aging research in genomic epidemiology consortium. J Gerontol