PTPN22 1858C>T (R620W) functional polymorphism and human longevity

Valerio Napolioni, Annalia Natali, Patrizia Saccucci, Nazzareno Lucarini

Received: 25 June 2010 / Accepted: 17 November 2010 / Published online: 27 November 2010

Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2010

Keywords: Association study, Genetic polymorphism, Human longevity, Italian population, Autoimmunity

1p13, which encodes lymphoid protein tyrosine phosphatase (LYP), plays a crucial role in the negative control of T lymphocyte activation. Since age-related changes in T-cell signal transduction may be one of the most important causes of cell-mediated immune response decline with aging, we performed a population-based association study to test whether the PTPN22 1858C>T (R620W) functional polymorphism affects the ability to survive to old age and reach exceptional life expectancy. We studied 892 unrelated healthy individuals (age range 8-106 years, 403 males and 489 females) from central Italy. For both genders, the frequency of PTPN22*T1858 carriers did not differ significantly in nona/centenarians and octogenarians compared to the young group. Allele and genotype frequencies of age groups were compared to those reported in previously published studies carried out on control individuals with Italian ancestry (N = 1393), further confirming results obtained from our sample population. Overall, our study suggests that the PTPN22*T1858 allele is not negatively selected at oldest ages, and we speculate that its increased ability to protect individuals against development of infectious diseases may counteract its deleterious effect on the immune system leading to autoimmunity.

Introduction

It is widely accepted that cell-mediated immune functions (cytotoxicity, delayed-type hypersensitivity, etc.) decline with age [1, 2]. These age-associated immunological changes render an individual more susceptible to infection and possibly cancer, as well as to age-associated autoimmune disorders. They may also contribute to atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's disease [3, 4]. Recent evidence suggests that T-cell hypo-responsiveness due to defects of signaling through the T Cell Receptor (TCR) from healthy elderly subjects or from individuals with autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus erythematosus results in an impaired ability to mount efficient immune responses and to maintain responsiveness to foreign antigens [5]. This implies that a high proportion of auto-reactive T cells might accumulate either intrathymically or in the periphery. T-cell anergy and differential TCR signaling could thus also be key players in the disruption of tolerance and the onset of autoimmune diseases.

The proliferation and clonal expansion of T lymphocytes are mostly controlled by interactions between the cytokine IL-2 and its cellular receptor [6] following TCR ligation [7]. It is now well accepted that the induction of IL-2 secretion decreases with age in mice, rats, and humans [8]. It seems that such defects occur in the transduction of mitogenic signals following TCR stimulation. Indeed, recent studies suggest that alterations in, for example, tyrosine kinase activity, intracellular free calcium, inositol phosphates, protein kinase C (PKC), and so on may all contribute to changes in signal transduction with aging [9-11]. Although the signaling machinery in T cells is extremely complicated and many steps remain to be clarified, the age-related change in T-cell signal transduction may be one of the most important causes of cell-mediated immune response decline with aging.

Chromosome 1p13, which encodes lymphoid protein tyrosine phosphatase (LYP), plays a crucial role in the negative control of T lymphocyte activation. LYP is expressed in lymphoid cells, mainly in T lymphocytes, where it associates with C-terminal Src kinase (CSK) to form a complex that suppresses the T-cell receptor signaling kinases LCK and FYN [12, 13]. Recently, a variant of PTPN22 (rs2476601, 1858C>T) has been associated with an increased risk for the development of multiple autoimmune diseases including type 1 diabetes (T1D) [14-16], rheumatoid arthritis [17], systemic lupus erythematosus [18], and Graves' disease [19]. This variant is a single nucleotide change at residue 1858 from C to T, which results in a single amino acid substitution from arginine to tryptophan at position 620 of the Lyp protein (Lyp 620W). Experimental evidence suggests that the disease-associated LYP variant Trp620 prevents the interaction of LYP with CSK [14]. Consequently, the T-cell receptor-associated kinases mightThe maximum age of males and females in our sample population was 100 and 106, respectively. Only one subject carrying the PTPN22 T*/T* genotype was found. Allelic and genotypic frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, regardless of whether males and females were considered together (χ² = 0.15, P = 0.698) or separately (males: χ² = 0.56, P = 0.454; females: χ² = 0.15, P = 0.698). The same situation occurred when age groups were considered (Table 1). For both genders, the frequency of PTPN22*T carriers did not differ significantly in nona/centenarians and in octogenarians with respect to the young group (Table 1). Overall, there was a trend toward higher frequencies of PTPN22*T carriers among females (10.2 vs. 7.2%, P = 0.08), but the frequency of *T carriers was not significantly associated with gender in each age group studied. Allele frequencies did not differ significantly among age groups (females χ² = 0.57, P = 0.752; males χ² = 0.33, P = 0.8479). The three-way contingency table analysis by log-linear model confirmed the irrelevant effect of PTPN22 genotype on the determination of life-span expectancy in the population x=age group; y=PTPN22 genotype (PTPN22 C*/C* PTPN22*T carriers); z=sex significant differences were reported (Table 3). We also carried out a comparison between the genotype frequencies of octogenarians-nona/centenarians and the pooled genotype frequency of younger individuals; no significant result was found (octogenarians, OR for T* carriers = 1.037, 95% CI 0.693-1.551, P = 0.862; nona/centenarians, OR for T* carriers = 1.253, 95% CI 0.800-2.014, P = 0.351), further confirming the results obtained from our study population. Of note, this comparison had sufficient power (0.80) to detect an association with a genotypic relative risk (or odds ratio) below 0.80 and/or above 1.2, thus excluding a marginal effect of PTPN22 1858C[T SNP on human longevity.

Discussion
Ageing is characterized by a pro-inflammatory status that could contribute to the onset of major age-related diseases. Indeed, genetic variations in pro- or anti-inflammatory cytokines were found to influence successful ageing and longevity [24]. These polymorphisms might confer flexibility in the immune response by allowing differential production of cytokines. Cytokine gene polymorphisms have been shown to be involved in the susceptibility, severity and clinical outcome of several diseases [25]. In particular, high producer alleles of pro-inflammatory cytokines have been associated with inflammatory age-related diseases [26] and disability [27] and with a decreased probability to reach extreme longevity [28]. Consequently, it can be hypothesized that anti-inflammatory cytokines might be involved in successful ageing and longevity.

As the PTPN22 gene product LYP is an important down-regulator of T lymphocyte activation and PTPN22-knockout mice showed selective dysregulation in the effector/memory T-cell compartment, with hyper-proliferation and early signaling responses in re-stimulated T cells [29], we wanted to test whether the PTPN22 1858C[T (R620W) polymorphism was associated with longevity.

To further support our results, allele and genotype frequencies of the younger group were compared with those reported in previously published studies carried out on control individuals with Italic ancestry (age <70 years), comprising the re-analysis of our previous data [23]. No significant differences were found.

Despite the established evidence of the strong negative effect exerted by PTPN22*T1858 allele on the immune system, conferring high susceptibility to a large subset of autoimmune diseases, we report a lack of association of PTPN22 1858C[T polymorphism with human longevity. Thus, the ability to survive to old age and to reach even exceptional life expectancy is largely unaffected by the genetically determined efficacy of the PTPN22-based immune response. On the other hand, it is noteworthy that the autoimmunity high-risk PTPN22*T1858 allele has been previously associated with a significant protective effect on Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection [30, 31]. This is an interesting fact since the burden of tuberculosis in the elderly is likely to continue to increase substantially [32]. Therefore, our results suggest that PTPN22*T1858 allele is not negatively selectedGenetic predisposition to produce high levels of IL is detrimental for longevity. Eur J Immunol: Hasegawa K, Martin F, Huang G, Tumas D, Diehl L, Chan AC (2004) PEST domain-enriched tyrosine phosphatase (PEP) regulation of effector/memory T cells. Science: Gomez LM, Anaya JM, Martin J (2006) Genetic influence of PTPN R W polymorphism in tuberculosis. Hum Immunol: Lamsyah H, Rueda B, Baassi L, Elaouad R, Bottini N, Sadki K et al (2008) Association of PTPN gene functional variants with development of pulmonary tuberculosis in Moroccan population. Tissue Antigens: Tocque K, Bellis MA, Tam CM, Chan SL, Syed Q, Remmington T et al (2001) Long-term trends in tuberculosis. Comparison of age-cohort data between Hong Kong and England and Wales. Am J Respir Crit Care Med: Franceschi C, Bonafe M, Valensin S, Olivieri F, De Luca M, Ottavini E et al (2000) Inflamm-aging. An evolutionary perspective on immunosenescence. Ann N Y Acad Sci: Ammendola M, Bottini N, Pietropolli A, Saccucci P, Gloria-Bottini F (2011) Association between PTPN and endometriosis. Fertil Steril: Latiano A, Palmieri O, Valvano MR, Bossa F, Latiano T, Corritore G et al (2013) Evaluating the role of genetic variations of PTPN , NFKB , and FRIIIA genes in inflammatory bowel disease: a meta-analysis. Inflamm Bowel Dis: Petrone A, Suraci C, Capizzi M, Giaccari A, Bosi E, Tiberti C et al (2013) The protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor (PTPN) is associated with high GAD antibody titer in latent autoimmune diabetes in adults: Non Insulin Requiring Autoimmune Diabetes (NIRAD) Study Diabetes Care: Palacios EH, Weiss A (2004) Function of the Src-family kinases, Lck and Fyn in T-cell development and activation. Oncogene: Bottini N, Musumeci L, Alonso A, Rahmouni S, Nika K, Rostamkhani M et al (2004) A functional variant of lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase is associated with type I diabetes. Nat Genet: Ladner MB, Bottini N, Valdes AM, Noble JA (2005) Association of the single nucleotide polymorphism C T of the PTPN gene with type diabetes. Hum Immunol: Onengut-Gumuscu S, Ewens KG, Spielman RS, Concannon P (2004) A functional polymorphism (C/T) in the PTPN gene is linked and associated with type I diabetes in multiplex families. Genes Immun: Begovich AB, Carlton VE, Honigberg LA, Schrodi SJ, Chokkalingam AP, Alexander HC et al (2004) A missense single-nucleotide polymorphism in a gene encoding a protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTPN) is associated with rheumatoid arthritis. Am J Hum Genet: Chung SA, Criswell LA (2003) PTPN: its role in SLE and autoimmunity. Autoimmunity: Vang T, Miletic AV, Bottini N, Mustelin T (2007) Protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPN in human autoimmunity. Autoimmunity: Rieck M, Arechiga A, Onengut-Gumuscu S, Greenbaum C, Concannon P, Buckner JH (2007) Genetic variation in PTPN corresponds to altered function of T and B lymphocytes. J Immunol: Miller SA, Dykes DD, Polesky HF (1988) A simple salting out procedure for extracting DNA from human nucleated cells. Nucleic Acids Res: Sokal RR, Rohlf JF (1995) Biometry. WH Freeman eds, New York Saccucci P, Del Duca E, Rapini N, Verrotti A, Piccinini S, Maccari A et al (2011) Association between PTPN C T and type diabetes: a replication in continental Italy. Tissue Antigens: Candore G, Colonna-Romano G, Balistreri CR, Di Carlo D, Grimaldi MP, Liste F et al (2006) Biology of longevity: role of the innate immune system. Re