unclear, recent studies have suggested that gene polymorphisms for diabetes mellitus, disease, and cancer may be associated in Koreans. This study aimed to identify susceptibility variants controlling longevity by performing a high-throughput candidate gene study using 137 Koreans over 90 years old and 213 young healthy Koreans. The researchers evaluated 463 informative markers located in 176 candidate genes mostly associated with diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, and cancer under five genetic models. They estimated odds ratios for each allele, genotype, haplotype, and gene-gene interaction using logistic regression analysis.

The study revealed associations between 13 genes and longevity at a P-value less than 0.01. Notably, the rs671 (A) allele of the aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 family (mitochondrial) (ALDH2) gene was associated with longevity only in men (odds ratio [OR] 2.11, P = 0.008). Four genes, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 1 (PCSK1, P = 0.008), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR, P = 0.003), paired box 4 (PAX4, P = 0.008), and V-yes-1 Yamaguchi sarcoma viral related oncogene homolog (LYN, P = 0.002), consistently yielded statistical evidence for association with longevity.

The findings of this study may provide a starting point for future research to unravel genetic factors related to longevity in Koreans.association with lifespan among nonagenarian women (P < 0.05) (data not shown). Among these, 26 SNPs of 22 genes showed a significant genotypic OR and 7 genes had a P value less than 0.01 (Table 2A). The genotypic effects of the rs2075650 (Thr241Met) in the PON1 and the rs1800795 (Asp299Gly) in the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) were stronger than the allelic effects in either direction. On the other hand, the allelic effect of the rs1042522 (Arg72Pro) in the TP53 was stronger than the genotypic effect. In addition, 86 SNPs located in 52 genes were statistically associated with one or more age/gender groups using regression models for five modes of inheritance (P < 0.05) (data not shown). Among these, the genotypic ORs of 70 SNPs located in 47 genes were nominally significant in at least one age/gender group and 10 genes had a P value less than 0.01 (Table 2B). The genotypic effect of the rs2075650 (Thr241Met) in the PON1 was also stronger than its allelic effect among nonagenarian women. In addition, the genotypic effect of the rs1800795 (Asp299Gly) in TLR4 was significant among nonagenarian women under a dominant model.Associations were analyzed between genes and lifespan in two age groups of women: those over 90 years old and centenarian women. The EGFR and PPP1R14C genes had lower allelic P values in the group of centenarians, but IL12RB2 was significant only in the younger group with more subjects. However, the rare T allele of rs2030071 was not common enough to determine the genetic model. A total of 27 SNPs located in 25 genes showed evidence for association with lifespan in both gender groups. Although the allelic effects of MGP and TNFSF11 were insignificant, these genes showed notable genotypic effects in the overdominant model. TG heterozygotes of rs1054016 were observed at lower frequencies among the old age group compared to the young age group. All 27 genes consistently showed evidence for association with lifespan in both allele- and genotype-based analyses, with six genes showing significant association attracting considerable attention as candidate genes affecting lifespan in Koreans: ADCY2, PPP1R1A, LYN, PAX4, ALDH2, and IL12RB2.

There were significant gender differences in genetic associations with longevity. Among the 69 genes that showed significant genotypic association, we found significant association with longevity in 12 genes by using tagSNPs for 32 genes with at least three genotyped SNPs. Among nine genes that consistently yielded significant evidence of allelic, genotypic, and haplotypic associations with longevity (i.e. HK2, ERBB4, PCSK1, ITK, EGFR, PAX4, LPL, LYN, and CDK10), only PCSK1, EGFR, PAX4, and LYN remained significant after the Bonferroni correction for multiple testing of haplotypes in each gene.

Figure 1 summarizes the -log (P value) obtained from three different analyses of association for these four genes. The presence of the G allele of rs155979 in the CGA haplotype of PCSK1 decreased lifespan among the group of nonagenarian men adjusted by sex. The G allele of rs712700 increased lifespan. A total of 43 SNPs located in 31 genes including four missense mutations located in each of eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase, NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 alpha subcomplex, 7 (NDUFA7), TNFSF11, and LYN showed evidence for association with longevity among nonagenarian men.rs2030071 is an intron C/T located at positions 159/3 and 156/16. The table presents results from haplotype-based analyses for candidate genes that show evidence of association with longevity. The best fitting mode of inheritance was determined using only SNPs with a significant genotypic OR from the most significant regression model (P < 0.01) for the gene. The table shows gene, SNPs, haplotypes, frequency, OR, 95% CI, and P value for each haplotype using a general linear model (GLM). The paper reports the first evidence associating the PCSK1, PAX4, EGFR, and LYN genes with human longevity.

The PCSK1 gene is an insulin-processing enzyme that regulates insulin biosynthesis. Mutations in this gene are associated with obesity, tumorigenesis, and metastasis. The PAX4 gene is a member of the paired box family of transcription factors that mediates differentiation of insulin-producing beta-cells in the pancreas and plays critical roles during cancer growth. The EGFR gene is a transmembrane glycoprotein that functions as a tyrosine protein kinase. Mutations in this gene have oncogenic potential in the development of non-small cell lung cancer. The LYN gene encodes a tyrosine kinase that is essential in immunoglobulin-mediated signaling, particularly in establishing B cell tolerance.

The study acknowledges that genetic variation exists across ethnic groups and reports significant association of genes for human leukocyte antigen. Supplemental Data Tables S2 and S3 present additional results for genotype combinations composed of each candidate SNP pair for two genes along with numbers of cases and controls. The study found significant epistatic interactions between PDGFC and GYS2 for males older than 90 years and between TNFSF11 and CDK10 in the group adjusted by gender. These interactions showed a dose-response relationship with increasing copies of the target allele for each SNP.genes and SNPs were nominally associated with longevity in at least one of the age/gender groups studied. However, it is important to note that the study had limitations, such as the inability to control for environmental factors due to lack of information in the control group. Additionally, the small number of centenarians may have reduced the statistical power to detect genes with weak effects, particularly in gene-gene interactions. The interpretation of findings using the over-dominant model and a control group consisting of 12-14 year old middle school students also raises concerns.

Although none of the SNPs achieved genome-wide significance, the underlying LD structure among the markers reduced the number of effectively independent tests, and thus, the genome-wide threshold of significance may be too stringent, particularly in the context of a candidate gene approach. The theory of evolution suggests that differential survival reflects the effect of deleterious genotypes of age-related diseases. However, some longevity genes (e.g., klotho associated with low HDL) buffer the deleterious effect of age-related disease genes (e.g., lipoprotein, Lp(a), a susceptibility gene for vascular disease), which may explain an observed paradoxical increase of deleterious genotypes in centenarians.

In this study, 60 genes out of 179 candidates were nominally associated with longevity in at least one age/gender group. Among eleven genes that consistently yielded statistical evidence of allelic, genotypic and haplotypic association with lifespan, only four genes remained significant after Bonferroni correction for haplotypes. The protein encoded by one of these four genes drew a 10 ml fasting venous blood sample in an EDTA tube. The gender and age composition of study subjects are shown in Supplemental Data Table S1.

For genetic variants with strong effects, relatively small sample size is sufficient to achieve statistical power to detect association. However, the rarity of centenarians makes international collaboration essential to increase statistical power for tests of gene by gene or gene by environment interaction. Continuing efforts may be necessary to find a functional variant in the associated region.

Candidate genes and SNP selection were based on searches for their functions in public databases (OMIM, Gene, etc.) and previous literature reviews. SNP markers within or near candidate genes were identified from the literature, the dbSNP database, the HapMap database, and Vector NTI software. A total of 565 informative single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers with high design scores provided by Illumina, Inc. and heterozygosity above 0.05 using 300 independent healthy Korean samples were included. Information for these 565 SNPs located in 194 genes is presented in Supplemental Data Table S2.

Overall, the study provides evidence for nominally associated candidate genes and SNPs with longevity in Korean populations, but further replication studies with larger sample sizes and international collaboration are necessary to increase statistical power and validate these findings.An allele of a potent SNP confers a greater likelihood of longevity in Koreans. Previous studies (Franceschi et al., 2000) have shown that the effects of gender mediate genetic association with the probability of achieving longevity, and the observed gender difference in our findings supports, in part, the gender-specific probability of achieving longevity. Interestingly, a few candidate gene variants with no or insignificant allelic effect revealed strong evidence for the allele with a large heterozygote effect on longevity (e.g. MGP, TNFSF11, and ABCC8).

DNA preparation and SNP genotyping:

Genomic DNA samples were prepared from peripheral blood using the QIAamp DNA Blood Maxi kit following the manufacturer's instructions (Qiagen, Inc., Valencia, CA). For each sample, we determined an average concentration of DNA from three repeated measures using a SpectraMax Plus 384 spectrophotometer (Molecular Devices, Inc., Sunnyvale, CA). A 250 ng aliquot of DNA was genotyped for SNP markers using Golden-Gate chemistry on Sentrix Array Matrices (Illumina, Inc.) at the Samsung Biomedical Research Institute. We confirmed genotypes showing significant statistical evidence for association with longevity using an ABI PRISM 3100 sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Inc., Foster City, CA).

As far as we know, this is the first association study of longevity susceptibility genes adopting a high-throughput candidate gene approach in nonagenarians and centenarians who rarely appear in Korea. An understanding of the mechanisms underlying aging and longevity by discovering novel susceptibility genes may lay the foundations for prediction, prevention, and treatment of age-related diseases. Thus, the findings of the current study may provide a starting point to unravel genetic factors controlling longevity for future studies.

Statistical analysis:

At each SNP, we separately computed the genotyping call rate (CR ≥ 95%), minor allele frequency (MAF ≥ 2%), and deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE P ≤ 0.0001) in the long-lived group and the young healthy group. We determined ancestral alleles for each SNP using the dbSNP database. We used the SNPs-based whole genome association studies (SNPassoc) program implemented in the free downloadable statistical software environment R v. 2.6.2 (http://www.r-project.org) to perform quality tests for genotypes (Gonzalez et al., 2007). We performed preliminary analyses of linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns using both D' and r2 and then selected a set of tagging SNPs within a gene for haplotype-based analysis using Haploview v. 4.0 (http://www.broad.mit.edu/mpg/haploview/index.php/).

Subjects:

We identified 137 long-lived individuals over 90 years old, including 35 centenarians, from the Korean Centenarian Study, which began in 1999 (Choi et al., 2003). We also selected 213 healthy middle school students from individuals who visited the Samsung Seoul Hospital for psychiatric tests in 2003 to be used for comparison. We included eight control samples from a three-generation family to test genotype quality. After obtaining informed consent from all subjects, a clinician interviewed study subjects.

We performed subsequent statistical analyses for each of four groups stratified by age and gender (nonagenarians, male nonagenarians, female nonagenarians, and female centenarians). We assessed allelic association with the chi-squared tests for individual SNPs and calculated the allelic odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) in both adjusted and stratified analyses using publicly available subroutines 'genassoc' and 'gamenu' in the STATA/SE v. 9 software package (http://www.gene.cimr.cam.ac.uk/clayton/software/stata/).

We performed genotypic association tests and logistic regression analyses implemented in the SNPassoc package in five different genetic models: codominant, dominant, recessive, over-dominant, and log-additive. To account for the impact of substructure or genetic relatedness among the subjects, we estimated the 'inflation factor ()' for each age-gender group and corrected P values by genomic control (Devlin and Roeder, 1999).

We used general linear models for the regression of longevity on ambiguous haplotypes. Rare haplotypes with an allele frequency of less than 1% were combined in a group to be analyzed. We applied logistic regression models (LRMs) to perform two-way interaction analyses between two SNPs for each gene (Briollais et al., 2007). For each of four age/gender groups, we screened the most promising pairs of SNPs that yielded P ≤ 0.01 for the interaction likelihood ratio test (i.e. LRT = -Of the pair of SNPs, Chanock SJ, Manolio T, Boehnke M, Boerwinkle E, Hunter DJ, Thomas G., Hirschhorn JN, Abecasis G., Altshuler D, Bailey-Wilson JE, Brooks LD, Cardon LR, Daly M, Donnelly P, Fraumeni JF Jr, Freimer NB, Gerhard DS, Gunter C, Guttmacher AE, Guyer MS, Harris EL, Hoh J, Hoover R, Kong CA, Merikangas KR, Morton CC, Palmer LJ, Phimister EG., Rice JP, Roberts J, Rotimi C, Tucker MA, Vogan KJ, Wacholder S, Wijsman EM and Winn DM Collins FS replicated genotype-phenotype associations. Nature 2007;447:655-60. Choi YH, Kim JH, Kim DK (twice), Kim JW (twice), Lee MS (twice), Kim CH and Park SC reported distributions of ACE and APOE polymorphisms and their relations with dementia status in Korean centenarians. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2003;58:227-31. We computed the statistical power of our sample sizes for each genotype using the web browser 'Genetic Power Calculator' (http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/~purcell/gpc/cc2.html) under an additive model with the assumption of disease allele frequencies of 0.3 and D' of 1. We also assumed a longevity prevalence of 0.13% and 0.002% for the Korean nonagenarians and centenarians respectively (Purcell et al., 2003). Christensen K., Johnson TE and Vaupel JW discussed the quest for genetic determinants of human longevity: challenges and insights in Nat Rev Genet 2006;7:436-48. A, Berardelli M., Motta M., Monti D., Bonafe M., Ferrucci L., Deiana L., Pes GM, Carru C, Desole MS, Barbi C, Sartoni G., Gemelli C, Lescai F., Olivieri F., Marchegiani F., Cardelli M., Cavallone L., Gueresi P, Cossarizza A, Troiano L, Pini G, Sansoni P, Passeri G, Lisa R, Spazzafumo L, Amadio L, Giunta S, Stecconi R, Morresi R, Viticchi C, Mattace R and De Benedictis G. studied if men and women follow different trajectories to reach extreme longevity in the Italian Multicenter Study on Centenarians (IMUSCE). Aging (Milano) 2000;12: Supplemental data. The supplemental data include three tables and can be found with this article online at http://e-emm.or.kr/article/article_files/SP-41-11-01.pdf.

We appreciated the technical support of our staff En Jin Han, Hanee Kwon and Yonghun Lim at the Center for Genome Research of the Samsung Biomedical Research Institute. We also gratefully acknowledge the hard work of those involved in collecting samples. This work was supported by the Research Program of dual regulation mechanisms of aging and cancer from the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (M1075604000107N5604-00110), the Korea Research Foundation for Health Science and Hallym University Research Fund 2009 (HRF-2009-000).

Gonzalez JR, Armengol L., Sole X., Guino E., Mercader JM., Estivill X. and Moreno V. developed SNPassoc: an R package to perform whole genome association studies in Bioinformatics 2007;23:644-5. Harder KW, Parsons LM, Armes J, Evans N, Kountouri N, Clark R, Quillici C, Grail D, Hodgson GS, Dunn AR and Hibbs ML studied gain- and loss-of-function Lyn mutant mice to define a critical inhibitory role for Lyn in the myeloid lineage in Immun 2002;3:741-8. Jee SH, Ohrr H., Sull JW, Yun JE, Ji M and Samet JM reported fasting serum glucose level and cancer risk in Korean men and women in JAMA 2005;293:194-202. Atzmon G., Rincon M., Schechter CB., Shuldiner AR., Lipton RB., Bergman A. and Barzilai N. discussed lipoprotein genotype and conserved pathway for exceptional longevity in humans in PLoS Biol 2006;4:e113. Kondo I. and Shimizu N. mapped the human gene for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) on the p13 leads to qQiao GB, Cheung AL, Guan XY. Co-overexpression of fibroblast growth factor 3 and epidermal growth factor receptor is correlated with the development of non-small cell lung carcinoma. Cancer 2006;106:146-55.

Ohagi S, Sakaguchi H, Sanke T, Tatsuta H, Hanabusa T, Nanjo K. Human prohormone convertase 3 gene: exon-intron organization and molecular scanning for mutations in Japanese subjects with NIDDM. Diabetes 1996;45:897-901.

Tzimas GN, Chevet E, Jenna S, Nguyen DT, Khatib AM, Marcus V, Zhang Y, Chretien M, Seidah N, Metrakos P. Abnormal expression and processing of the proprotein convertases PC1 and PC2 in human colorectal liver metastases. BMC Cancer 2005;5:149.

Parravicini V, Gadina M, Kovarova M, Odom S, Gonzalez-Espinosa C, Furumoto Y, Saitoh S, Samelson LE, O'Shea JJ, Rivera J. Fyn kinase initiates complementary signals required for IgE-dependent mast cell degranulation. Nature.