The common germline Arg72Pro polymorphism of p53 and increased longevity in humans

Stig E. Bojesen & Børge G. Nordestgaard

Published online: 04 Feb 2008.

To cite this article: Stig E. Bojesen & Børge G. Nordestgaard (2008) The common germline Arg72Pro polymorphism of p53 and increased longevity in humans, Cell Cycle, 7:2, 158-163, DOI: 10.4161/cc.7.2.5249

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the Content) contained in the publications on our platform. Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Published Taylor & Francis and Routledge Open articles and Taylor & Francis and Routledge Open Select articles posted to institutional or subject repositories or any other third-party website are without warranty from Taylor & Francis of any kind, either expressed or implied, including but not limited to warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Any opinions and views expressed in the article are those of the authors and are not endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor & Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

The common germline Arg72Pro polymorphism of p53 and increased longevity in humans

Stig E. Bojesen* and Børge G. Nordestgaard

Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Herlev Hospital, Herlev, Denmark; Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark

SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism

Key words: longevity, aging, mortality, p53, Arg72Pro, SNP, polymorphism, cancer risk

Ground allowing selection equilibrium to be established. These two assumptions, however, are not met when it comes to multifactorial diseases relevant to the aging population in modern affluent and fast-developing societies. Therefore, a priori it is quite possible that SNPs could be causative and thus associated with multifactorial diseases and even lifespan. The relative effect-size in most cases is probably small and in the order of 10-100% change of relative risk.

More than ten million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified in humans; however, the importance of most SNPs for health and disease is not understood. Most SNPs are indeed unimportant and because of often inadequately powered studies, many observations on SNP effects cannot be repeated by other researchers. SNPs are at best shown to influence protein function or level, rarely to influence the risk of disease, and almost never to influence total mortality, the ultimate endpoint.

A well-known functional SNP in the tumor suppressor TP53 gene leads to increased longevity: in the Danish general population (n=9219), homozygotes for the minor allele versus homozygotes for the major allele had an increase in median survival of 3 years. This is partly explained by increased survival after the development of cancer or other diseases, in accordance with the observation that Arg72Pro substitution in the p53 protein has an important influence on cell death via increased apoptosis. Thus, increased longevity may be due to a generally increased robustness after a diagnosis of any life-threatening disease. In contrast to widespread skepticism on the importance of SNPs in humans, this gain-of-function p53 SNP of importance for cell repair has a profound influence on longevity.

Admittedly, the history of genetic association with common multifactorial diseases is full of irreproducible studies with a reproducibility ratio of 16%, probably due to inflated estimates in small underpowered case-studies, inadequate selection of controls, and bias favoring positive associations. These failures in the past imply that studies on genetic variations and their association with multifactorial diseases must be very large if the results are to be trusted, and they must include the relevant population suited to answer the questions asked with as little bias as possible. To meet these demands, large prospective studies of the general population are the gold-standard: in his proposal for a prospective study in the US, Francis Collins states that (genetic) associations and estimation of their magnitude, consistency and temporality (all key criteria for epidemiological evidence of causal relationships) are best obtained through prospective, population-based cohort studies and that prospective cohort studies provide a valuable, feasible and indeed indispensable means of exploring the genetic basis of complex human diseases. In Denmark such a prospective study, The Copenhagen City Heart Study, was already established in theInterval, 0.9-1.1) vs. Arg/Arg homozygotes. Despite these beneficial effects of increased p53 activity for cancer resistance, mice overexpressing p53 age prematurely and even die earlier than their wild-type counterparts. Thus, activation of p53 is beneficial when the organism is young, but in older organisms it might reduce lifespan and even augment cancer risk, so-called antagonistic pleiotropy. In accordance with this concept, p53 accelerates aging when responding to cellular stress. In cell cultures, inactivation of normal p53 activity in senescent cells completely reverses the senescent arrest and allows the cells to resume cell divisions for many despite critically shortened telomeres. The germline truncating mutations of TP53, the gene coding for p53, are associated with a rare autosomal dominant disorder, the Li-Fraumeni syndrome. This syndrome is characterized by multiple primary neoplasms in children and young adults, with a predominance of soft-tissue sarcomas, osteosarcomas, breast cancer, brain tumors.

Participants (n = 9,219) of The Copenhagen City Heart Study were genotyped for the p53 Arg72Pro polymorphism using the Nanogen system. Taking advantage of the 100% complete follow-up, we were able to examine association between the Arg72Pro genotype and risk of any cancer (Fig. 3). For Arg/Pro heterozygotes vs. Arg/Arg homozygotes, we found a borderline increased gender and age-adjusted hazard ratio for all cancer of 1.1 (95% CI: 1.0-1.2), but since the equivalent hazard ratio for Pro/Pro homozygotes was nominally decreased at 0.9 (0.8-1.1), we considered this as a chance-finding.

Several germline SNPs in TP53 have been identified, most of them located in introns and of uncertain significance. The SNP rs1042522 is, however, located in exon 4 and results in an arginine to proline amino acid substitution in position 72 of the p53 protein. In 6 subtypes of cancer (gastrointestinal, respiratory, urologic, female, male and other types) including risk of melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancer (both in the other category), we generally did not find any association with Arg72Pro genotype (Fig. 3); surprisingly however, the risk of hematologic cancer increased 2-fold in Arg/Pro heterozygotes vs. Arg/Arg homozygotes (p < 0.001), with a similar trend in Pro/Pro homozygotes. This 2-fold increased risk was significant even after correction for multiple testing and therefore might represent a real phenomenon rather than a chance finding; however, this needs to be confirmed in another independent study.

We next sought to validate earlier findings suggesting association of Arg72Pro with risk of a variety of other diseases. However, in our study, Arg72Pro genotype was not associated with risk of cardiovascular or other diseases (Fig. 4, left).

Having examined Arg72Pro genotype and morbidity, we next examined mortality. The overall 12-year survival after blood sampling was increased in Arg/Pro heterozygotes with 3% (p = 0.003) and in Pro/Pro homozygotes with 6% (p = 0.002) vs. Arg/Arg homozygotes (Fig. 5, left). This corresponds to a sex and age-adjusted hazard ratio for death from any cause in Arg/Pro heterozygotes and Pro/Pro homozygotes vs. Arg/Arg homozygotes of 0.88 (95% CI: 0.81-0.96) and 0.82 (0.68-0.97), respectively (Fig. 4, right). This reduction in risk of death translates into an increased median survival of 2 years and 3 years for Arg/Pro heterozygotes and Pro/Pro homozygotes vs. Arg/Arg homozygotes (Fig. 5, right). In accordance with this, the frequency of Pro allele appeared to increase with increasing age, especially after age 90 years when the mortality of the participants begins to rise (Fig. 6). The Leiden 85-plus study found increased survival in Pro/Pro homozygotes vs. Arg/Arg homozygotes among 1226 participants aged 85 years or older followed for 5-10 years.

As already shown, the stepwise increased longevity in p53 Arg/Pro heterozygotes and Pro/Pro homozygotes vs. Arg/Arg homozygotes was not explained by decreased risk of developing cancer, cardiovascular diseasePhase 23. We therefore speculate that modulation of p53 is insignificantly, stepwise reduced with increasing number of Pro72 alleles (trend-test, p = 0.13) (Fig. 4, right). For all analyses described above, multifactorial adjustment for other potential confounders (cumulative tobacco consumption, smoking status, body mass index, alcohol consumption, plasma cholesterol, systolic blood pressure, and physical inactivity) gave similar risk estimates (data not shown).

Perspectives: The search for SNPs in the human genome is advancing; however, understanding the importance of such SNPs for mortality is limited. Inferring the impact on human health from knowledge of genetic variation to change of protein function further to influences on the cellular level and finally to affect the entire person can be extremely difficult. The DNA G251C substitution in the TP53 gene causing the Arg72Pro substitution of p53 leads to decreased binding to p73 and decreased location to mitochondria; at the cellular level, this protein change leads to decreased apoptosis and increased G cell cycle arrest, which we now demonstrate lead to increased survival after life-threatening diseases and overall survival of the entire person (Fig. 8). 

Figure 6. Frequency of mortality (black dots) and the p53 Arg72Pro Pro allele (green dots) as a function of age in five-year groups. Participants were from the Copenhagen City Heart Study.

Figure 7. General population 5-year survival after a cancer diagnosis in p53 Arg72Pro Arg/Arg homozygotes, Arg/Pro heterozygotes, and Pro/Pro homozygotes. Only cancers diagnosed one year prior to blood sampling and afterwards were included. We followed participants with a cancer diagnosis from The Copenhagen City Heart Study. Reproduced with permission from Journal of Experimental Medicine, 2007; 204:1295-301.

Figure 8. Effect of the p53 Arg72Pro polymorphism at the level of protein sequence, protein function, cell, and whole organism. 

The present study thus illustrates that large human studies are sine qua nons of modern biomedical research, and we believe that this represents another lesson from our study: laboratory and population-based research are each indispensable and complement each other in identifying and describing factors that contribute to human health and disease. In vitro, cell, and animal studies are extremely important for understanding basic mechanisms. However, results from such studies alone will never be able reliably to predict the effect in humans. To study such effects, studies in humans are necessary, preferably by using the golden standard of large population-based studies, as exemplified in the present study by the Copenhagen City Heart Study.

Function might improve clinical in intensive care, cardiology, neurology as well as in oncology patients. Expression profiles are now reaching clinical use; our work suggests that also germline genetic variations in the host organism influence prognosis. In our case, this single p53 polymorphism extends lifespan after a cancer diagnosis with several years. Interestingly, the improved prognosis in Arg/Pro heterozygotes and Pro/Pro homozygotes vs. Arg/Arg homozygotes seems to be relatively independent of the type of disease, indicating that the mechanism might be an unspecific improved robustness in the organism experiencing any life-threatening disease.

References:

1. Breast Cancer Association Consortium. Commonly studied single-nucleotide polymorphisms and breast cancer: results from the Breast Cancer Association Consortium. J Natl Cancer Inst.; 2006:98(19):1382-1396.

2. Ørsted DD, Bojesen SE, Tybjærg-Hansen A, Nordestgaard BG. Tumor suppressor p53 Arg72Pro polymorphism and longevity, cancer survival, and risk of cancer in the general population. J Exp Med.; 2007:204(6):1295-1301.

3. Rudin CM, Thompson CB. Apoptosis and Cancer. In: Scriver CS, Beaudet AL, Sly WS, Valle D, editors. The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease. 8th ed. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill; 2001: pp 2237-2272.

4. Lombard DB, Chua KF, Mostoslavsky R, Franco S, Gostissa M, Alt FW. DNA repair, genome stability, and aging. Cell.; 2005:120(4):497-512.

5. Tyner SD, Venkatachalam S, Choi J, Jones S, Ghebranious N, Igelmann H, Lu X, Soron G, Cooper B, Brayton C, Hee PS, Thompson T, Karsenty G, Bradley A, Donehower LA. p53 mutant mice that display early ageing-associated phenotypes. Nature.; 2002:415(6867Del Sal G, Syed N, Smith P, Gasco M, Crook T, Lu X. SPP preferentially binds the proline-rich region and modulates apoptotic function of codon-polymorphic p53. Nat Genet; 2002: 30(3):  336-341.
Storey A, Thomas M, Kalita A, Harwood C, Gardiol D, Mantovani F, Breuer J, Leigh IM, Matlashewski G, Banks L. Role of a p53 polymorphism in the development of human papillomavirus-associated cancer. Nature; 1998: 393(6682): 229-234.
Thomas M, Kalita A, Labrecque S, Pim D, Banks L, Matlashewski G. Two polymorphic variants of wild-type p53 differ biochemically and biologically. Mol Cell Biol; 1999:19(2): 1092-1100.
Beckman G, Birgander R, Sjalander A, Saha N, Holmberg PA, Kivela A, Beckman L. Is p53 polymorphism maintained by natural selection? Hum Hered; 1994:44(5):266-270.
Bastiaens MT, Struyk L, Tjong AH, Gruis N, ter Huurne J, Westendorp RGJ, Vermeer BJ, Bavinck JNB, ter Schegget J. Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma and p53 codon polymorphism: A need for screening? Molecular Carcinogenesis; 1999:26(4):308-313.
Han JL, Cox DG, Colditz GA, Hunter DJ. The p53 codon polymorphism, sunburns, and risk of skin cancer in US Caucasian women. Molecular Carcinogenesis; 2006:45(10): 796-800.