Unique Lipoprotein Phenotype and Genotype Associated With Exceptional Longevity

Individuals with exceptional longevity have a lower incidence and/or significant delay in the onset of age-related diseases, and their family members may inherit biological factors that modulate aging processes and disease susceptibility.

Design, Setting, and Participants

In a case-control design, 213 Ashkenazi Jewish probands with exceptional longevity (mean [SD] age, 98.2 [5.3] years) and their offspring (n=216; mean [SD] age, 68.3 [6.7] years) were recruited from 1998 to 2002. An age-matched control group of Ashkenazi Jews (n=258) and participants from the Framingham Offspring Study (n=589) were accepted as control groups.

Main Outcome Measures

Detailed questionnaires, physical examination, and blood samples were taken, including assessment of lipids and lipoprotein subclass levels and particle sizes by proton nuclear magnetic resonance. Samples were also genotyped for the codon 405 isoleucine to valine (I405V) variation in the cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) gene, which is involved in regulation of lipoprotein and its particle.

Individuals with exceptional longevity have been generally spared from major age-related diseases that are responsible for most deaths in elderly persons, such as cardiovascular disease (CVD), diabetes mellitus, Alzheimer's disease, and cancer. Various studies suggest that genetic determinants of exceptional longevity are highly heritable. Siblings of centenarians have an 8- to 17-fold higher probability of living past the age of 100 years, accounting for only approximately 1 in 10,000 individuals in the general population. The offspring of long-lived parents have an approximately 50% lower prevalence of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, myocardial infarction, and stroke/transient ischemic attacks compared with age-matched control groups. Furthermore, at least one study linked a locus on chromosome 4 to exceptional longevity. Identification of biological markers and genes that are conducive to exceptional longevity may provide insights into mechanisms that protect individuals from a host of common diseases and/or slow the biological processes of aging.

Results

High-density lipoprotein (HDL) and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particle sizes were significantly higher in probands compared with both control groups (P=.001 for both), independent of plasma levels of HDL and LDL cholesterol and apolipoprotein A1 and B. This phenotype was also typical of the probands' offspring but not of the age-matched controls. The HDL and LDL particle sizes were significantly larger in offspring and controls without hypertension or cardiovascular disease (P=.001 and P=.008, respectively). Furthermore, lipoprotein particle sizes, but not plasma LDL levels, were significantly higher in offspring and controls without the metabolic syndrome (P<.001). Probands and offspring had a 2.9- and 3.6-fold (in men) and 2.7- and 1.5-fold (in women) increased frequency, respectively, of homozygosity for the 405 valine allele of CETP (VV genotype), compared with an age-matched control group (P<.001 for both). Those probands with the VV genotype had increased lipoprotein sizes and lower serum CETP concentrations.

Conclusions

Individuals with exceptional longevity and their offspring have significantly larger HDL and LDL particle sizes. This phenotype is associated with a lower prevalence of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, the metabolic syndrome, and increased homozygosity for the I405V variant in CETP. These findings suggest that lipoprotein particle sizes are heritable and promote a healthy aging phenotype.

JAMA. 2003;290:2030-2040 www.jama.com

Author Affiliations: Institute for Aging Research, Diabetes Research and Training Center (Drs Barzilai and Atzmon), Department of Neurology (Dr Lipton), and Department of Family Medicine and Community Health (Dr Schechter), Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY; University of Maryland School of Medicine and the Geriatrics Research and Education Clinical Center, Baltimore Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Baltimore (Dr Shuldiner); Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Tufts University, Boston, Mass (Dr Schaefer); Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Mass (Dr Cupples); and Department of Human Genetics, Roche Molecular Systems Inc, Alameda, Calif (Dr Cheng). Financial Disclosure: Dr Cheng is employed by Roche Molecular Systems. Corresponding Author and Reprints: Nir Barzilai, MD, Institute for Aging Research, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Belfer Bldg 701, 1300 Morris Park Ave, Bronx, NY 104Einstein College of Medicine. We followed the National Cholesterol Education Program (Adult Treatment Panel III) guidelines, defining the metabolic syndrome as the presence of 3 or more of the 5 risk factors: increased waist girth (>94 cm for women, >102 cm for men), increased blood pressure (>130/85 mm Hg or treatment for hypertension), increased fasting glucose (>110 mg/dL [6.11 mmol/L] or drug treatment for diabetes), low plasma HDL cholesterol (<40 mg/dL [1.04 mmol/L]), and elevated fasting triglyceride levels (>150 mg/dL [1.70 mmol/L]). We developed a novel study design in a genetically homogeneous founder population to identify the biological and genetic underpinnings of exceptional longevity by studying Ashkenazi Jewish families defined by long-lived probands. In addition, we recruited the offspring of probands and an age-matched control group, hypothesizing that the former may have inherited certain biological protective factors that could be more easily discerned at younger ages if compared with an age-matched control group.

Lipids and Lipoproteins Total plasma cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL, LDL, very LDL, and apolipoprotein A-I and B concentrations for Ashkenazi participants were performed by standard automated methods at the clinical laboratories of Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY. The same lipid measurements were performed on fasting plasma samples from the Framingham Offspring Study as previously described. The LDL and HDL subclass levels and mean particle sizes were determined for all participants by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy at LipoScience Inc (Raleigh, NC) as previously described. Each NMR measurement produces the concentrations of 3 LDL subclasses and 5 HDL subclasses of varying size. From the LDL and HDL subclass levels are calculated weighted-mean LDL and HDL particle sizes (nm diameter) and LDL particle concentrations (nmol/L). Lipoprotein subclasses were grouped as large LDL (21.3-23.0 nm), intermediate LDL (19.8-21.2 nm), small LDL (18.3-19.7 nm), large HDL (8.8-13.0 nm), intermediate HDL (8.2-8.8 nm), and small HDL (7.3-8.2 nm). Although the LDL sizes ranged from 18.3 to 23.0 nm and HDL sizes from 7.3 to 13.0 nm, small changes within this range are associated with marked clinical differences in CVD risks.

In a case-control study, Ashkenazi Jews were recruited as described elsewhere. This population derived from an undetermined small number (estimated to be in the several thousands) of founders. External factors, including ecclesiastical edicts prohibiting all social contact with Jews, the Crusades, the establishment of the Pale of Settlement, numerous pogroms, and ethnic bigotry, resulted in the social isolation and inbreeding of the Ashkenazi Jews.

Statistical Analyses Because the extreme old age of the probands preempts a proper comparison (control) group, we also recruited the offspring of probands, some of whom presumably inherited longevity genes and thus should manifest the longevity phenotype. Candidate longevity phenotypes could then be compared between the offspring and age-matched Ashkenazi controls or non-Ashkenazi participants of the Framingham Offspring Study, neither of which are known to have longevity genes. There were no significant differences between the groups for routine blood chemistries, including electrolytes, liver function, and kidney function tests. Body mass index (BMI, calculated as weight in kilograms divided by the square of height in meters) was similar between offspring and the Ashkenazi control groups (P=.75 and P=.21 in women and men, respectively), both of which were significantly higher than in probands (TABLE 1). Typical measures of lipoproteins, including total cholesterol, HDL, LDL, and triglycerides were quite similar in probands compared with control group as well as between offspring and control groups. Only total cholesterol and LDL levels were lower in female probands vs control groups, and HDL levels were significantly higher in female offspring compared with Ashkenazi control groups. In contrast, there were marked differences between groups in lipoprotein particle sizes as determined by NMR. The HDL and LDL particle sizes in probands were markedly higher compared with both control groups (P=.001). Furthermore, the offspring of probands had a bimodal distribution of HDL particle sizes that was not seen in the control groups (P<.001), as well as a significantly different distribution of LDL particle size in offspring of probands compared with control groups. These distributions suggest that only a subset of offspring carry the high HDL trait, which may have been inherited in these individuals. Additionally, this distribution couldcorrection of spelling errors, word splitting, and grammar:

In the first sentence, "pro- bands" should be "probands." In the second sentence, "off- spring" should be "offspring." In the same sentence, "com- pared" should be "compared." In the third sentence, "til" should be "until." In the same sentence, "gests" should be "suggests." In the fourth sentence, "ticle" should be "particle."

In the fifth sentence, there is an unnecessary duplication of "the relationship." It should read: "The same relationship was apparent when men and women were considered separately."

In the sixth sentence, "considered" should be "controlling."

In Figure 1, the word "noitalupoP" is an error and should read "Population."

In Figure 2, there are several errors. The words "selcitraP" and "latoT" are errors and should read "Percentage" and "Total," respectively. The word "where" in the second-to-last sentence should be changed to "was."

In the last sentence, there is an unnecessary duplication of the word "lipoprotein." It should read: "...possible link between lipoprotein particle size and age-related..."Hypertension and cardiovascular disease (CVD) are risk factors for many causes of death. The metabolic syndrome, also known as insulin resistance syndrome or syndrome X, is also a risk factor for many age-related diseases, including CVD, dementia, infections, and cancer. This study analyzed cross-sectional data from probands with exceptional longevity aged 95 to 107 years (n=191), Ashkenazi and Framingham control groups combined aged 60 to 95 years (n=878), and their offspring aged 60 to 80 years (n=206). HDL indicates high-density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein.

The allele frequencies of the 629 C/A and D442G in Ashkenazi control groups were 0.57 and 0, respectively. Neither allele nor genotype frequencies of the 629 C/A variant differed significantly among probands, offspring, or Ashkenazi control groups, nor was this variant associated with lipoprotein levels or particle sizes. By contrast, allele frequencies of the I405V allele were 0.46, 0.43, and 0.29 in probands, offspring, and Ashkenazi control groups, respectively. Strikingly, the frequency of homozygosity for the codon 405 valine allele of CETP (VV genotype) was 24.8% in female and male probands compared with only 8.6% in Ashkenazi control groups. These differences were statistically significant in both men and women (P < .001 for both) (FIGURE 4).

Cholesteryl ester transfer protein has been shown to modulate HDL and LDL levels and sizes. To determine if genetic variation in CETP might influence lipoprotein particle size or longevity, we analyzed several common single nucleotide polymorphisms of CETP. All of the single nucleotide polymorphisms examined were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in probands, their offspring, and the Ashkenazi control groups (Framingham Offspring Study samples were not genotyped). The offspring of probands had a VV genotype frequency of 20.7% in women and men combined, intermediate between probands and control groups and also significantly higher than in control groups (P = .004).

In principle, one cannot calculate the attributable risk of VV genotype for longevity from a case-control study because it is derived from incidence rates. However, a reasonable approximation can be calculated by using the estimation formula: where P is the prevalence of VV homozygosity in the population and OR is the odds ratio associating VV homozygosity with longevity. This estimation formula is valid so long as the outcome (longevity) is rare in the population (approximately 1 of 5000-10000). In our data, the OR (combining men and women) is 3.56. We do not have a direct observation of population prevalence of VV homozygosity in our data. However, it is reasonable to take the control groups as a proxy for the population as a whole because the number of people who will ultimately survive to longevity is a very small proportion of the population. Our estimate of the prevalence of VV homozygosity is 0.09, and applying the formula, population attributable risk fraction is 18.1.

We also assessed the relationship between CETP I405V genotype and lipoprotein particle sizes and CETP activity in the control, offspring, and proband groups, respectively. The VV phenotype was associated with significantly larger LDL and HDL particle sizes (TABLE 3). Furthermore, participants with the VV genotype had 17% lower CETP concentrations compared with those with II or IV genotype, and HDL level and CETP levels were negatively correlated.(r=0.29; P=.03; Spearman p). These findings suggest a survival advantage for individuals with the VV genotype, perhaps mediated through decreased levels of CETP and its effects on lipoproteins and their particle sizes. The frequency of homozygosity for the codon 405 isoleucine to valine (I405V) allele of cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) in female and male probands (n=156), offspring (n=163), and Ashkenazi controls (n=129). The frequency of the VV genotype is 2.4- and 2.9-fold increased in offspring and probands, respectively, compared with Ashkenazi controls. *P=.001; P=.20; P=.004; P<.001, indicating differences between probands and offspring vs Ashkenazi controls for women and men.

Table 3. CETP I405V Genotype and Lipoprotein Characteristic and Plasma CETP Levels in Families With Exceptional Longevity and Control Groups

CETP I405V Genotype, Mean (SD) P Value (VV vs Variable Genotypes) HDL Concentration, mg/dL 57 (18) 55 (16) 55 (16) .53 Large particle size, % of total 56 (16) 60 (14) 60 (15) .10 Particle size, nm 9.28 (0.56) 9.09 (0.52) 9.07 (0.48) .02 LDL Concentration, mg/dL 114 (35) 120 (30) 123 (34) .16 Large particle size, % of total 67 (25) 58 (24) 56 (28) .02 Particle size, nm 21.29 (0.67) 20.98 (0.63) 20.88 (0.81) .002 CETP concentration, g/mL 1.65 (0.59) 1.92 (0.65) 1.99 (0.72) <.001

COMMENT

Abbreviations: CETP, cholesteryl ester transfer protein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; I405V, codon 405 valine; LDL, low-density lipoprotein. SI conversion factor: To convert HDL and LDL concentrations to mmol/L, multiply by 0.0259.

(Reprinted) JAMA, October 15, 2003 Vol 290, No. 15 2037 2003 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.

Because it has been shown that lipoprotein sizes are genetically determined,33 we were interested in finding potential pathways involved in this phenotype. The biology of rare forms of CETP deficiency may be relevant to our observation of a marked increase in the frequency of homozygosity for the common codon 405 valine CETP allele in our families with longevity. Although homozygosity for this variant was observed in 24.8% of our probands, it was present at a frequency of only 8.6% in Ashkenazi Jewish control participants. Offspring of long-lived individuals also had a much higher frequency of the VV genotype compared with control groups.

With analyses of 30 different single nucleotide polymorphisms, it could be argued that our positive finding for I405V CETP is the result of multiple comparisons. However, the level of statistical significance of this association (P<.001) maintains statistical significance even after rigorous correction for multiple comparisons. Furthermore, investigation of this variant was hypothesis-driven based on known pathways of lipoprotein metabolism.

Correction for multiple comparisons would be considered by many as overly conservative. To our knowledge, there is no other example of a polymorphic allele whose frequency was demonstrated to be so dramatically increased in centenarians and for which there is plausible biological mechanism to explain the association. Although the effect of the valine405 allele on the structure and function of the CETP protein has not been studied, homozygosity for the valine allele has been shown to result in significantly decreased CETP concentrations,34-36 as we demonstrated; and significantly decreased CETP activity,37-39 as confirmed by Boekholdt and Thompson.40 Furthermore, in 2 populations, each with more than 1000 participants, valine 405 homozygosity was associated with a 6.5-mg/dL or approximately 13% increase41 and approximately 4% increase42 in HDL cholesterol.

Although this VV homozygosity appears in less than 20% of the offspring, spouses or neighbors of the offspring, neither of which were enriched with longevity genes, and the cases were the offspring group who were children of the probands. Therefore, differences in environment, social,Explained by other variants in CETP or in other genes that modulate lipoprotein particle concentrations and size. Other single nucleotide polymorphisms in the CETP genes did not differ in frequency between our groups. Moreover, we analyzed regulatory domains of hepatic lipase, which also regulates lipoprotein size, and failed to note any increased frequency of any of the variants we found. Recently, Arai et al. investigated more than 200 Japanese centenarians for association between a CETP TaqI polymorphism (but not the I405V polymorphism) as well as hepatic lipase polymorphisms and did not demonstrate an increase in frequency in this population. Because CETP deficiency has not been previously associated with increased LDL size, additional genes that modulate LDL size or environmental factors are likely to be involved in the regulation of LDL particle sizes and may be necessary to enhance the probability of exceptional longevity. Whether lipoprotein particle size and the I405V CETP polymorphism are important predictors of longevity in other populations remains to be determined.

Statistical expertise: Atzmon, Schechter, Cupples. Obtained funding: Barzilai, Shuldiner. Administrative, technical, or material support: Barzilai, Atzmon, Schaefer, Lipton, Cheng, Shuldiner.

Funding/Support: This work was supported by grants from the Paul Beeson Physician Faculty Scholar in Aging Award, the Ellison Medical Foundation Senior Scholar Award (RO1 AG-18728-01A1), the General Clinical Research Center (MO1-RR12248), and Diabetes Research and Training Center (DK20541) at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and the Baltimore Veterans Affairs Geriatric Research and Education Clinical Center. Roche Molecular Systems developed genotyping reagents for research use.

Acknowledgment: We thank William Greiner, Deborah Davidson, David Rosen, Reena Gotesman, Pegah Rabizadah, and Carmel Schahar for their contributions to this study; Harry Shamoon, MD, Norman Fleischer, MD, Ilan Gabriely, MD, and Luciano Rossetti, MD, for their support; and David S. Freedman, PhD, for reading and commenting on this article. We are indebted to all participants and their families for their dedication and enthusiasm. We are also grateful to the following institutions that assisted in recruitment: The Hebrew Home for the Aging, Riverdale, NY; Kittay House, Bronx, NY; the Hebrew Home Hospital, West Hartford, Conn; and the Jewish Home for the Aged, New Haven, Conn., all under the aegis of the association for the Jewish Aging Services, Washington, DC.

In recent years, certain genetic manipulations in lower species have been shown to extend lifespan by mechanisms that seem unlikely to be relevant in humans. Our endeavor to study exceptional longevity in Ashkenazi Jews was based on evidence for strong inheritance of this phenotype. However, the lack of good biological markers that might provide mechanistic insights into exceptional longevity has hampered systematic genetic analysis.

The important findings of this work suggest pleiotropic vascular effects of lipoproteins with large particle sizes that are health-promoting. Striking association of exceptional longevity with homozygosity for the valine 405 allele of CETP may explain in part the link between lipoprotein particle size and exceptional longevity. Further elucidation of the genetic and biological mechanisms that determine lipoprotein particle sizes may provide key insights into preventive and therapeutic interventions for several age-related diseases that impart significant morbidity and mortality to elderly individuals.

REFERENCES

1. Barzilai N., Shuldiner AR. Searching for human longevity genes: the future history of gerontology in the post-genomic era. J Gerontol. 2001;56A:M83-M87.

2. Perls TT, Wilmoth J, Levenson R, et al. Life-long sustained mortality advantage of siblings of centenarians. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99:8442-

Case-control studies are subject to problems that sometimes limit their validity. However, in the case of genetic studies, these limitations are frequently overcome. A major problem affecting case-control studies is biased-recall ascertainment of exposure status. When the exposure is a genotype, however, this problem cannot arise. Similarly, the use of prevalent cases and control groups entails length-biased sampling; but with longevity as the outcome, once again the problem is nullified.

Case-control studies cannot by themselves establish a causal relationship but with a genotype exposure, at least the possibility of reverse causality is entirely excluded, and the exposure is unequivocally known to precede the outcome. The recruitment of cases and control groups from separate population groups is another common source of bias in case-control studies. In our situation, the controls were Atzmon G., Schechter C.,Falcone SM, Macka FC. Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. Essex, England: Addison Wesley Longman; Lakka HM, Laaksonen DE, Lakka TA, et al. The metabolic syndrome and total and cardiovascular disease mortality in middle-aged men. JAMA. 2002;288:2709-2716. Yamashita S, Sprecher DL, Sakai N, et al. Accumulation of apolipoprotein E-rich high-density lipoproteins in hyperalphalipoproteinemic human subjects with plasma cholesteryl ester transfer protein deficiency. J Clin Invest. 1990;86:688-694. Ikewaki K, Nishiwaki M, Sakamoto T, et al. Increased catabolic rate of low density lipoproteins in humans with cholesteryl ester transfer protein deficiency. J Clin Invest. 1995;96:1573-1581. Sakai N, Yamashita S, Hirano K, et al. Decreased affinity of low density lipoprotein (LDL) particles for LDL receptors in patients with cholesteryl ester transfer protein deficiency. Eur J Clin Invest. 1995;25:332-339. Bruce C, Sharp DS, Tall AR. Relationship of HDL and coronary heart disease to a common amino acid polymorphism in the cholesteryl ester transfer protein in men with and without hypertriglyceridemia. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1998;18:163-171. Arai T, Tsukada T, Murase T, et al. Particle size analysis of high density lipoproteins in patients with genetic cholesteryl ester transfer protein deficiency. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 1994;14:1984-1991. Otvos JD. Measurement of lipoprotein subclass profiles by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Clin Lab. 2002;48:171-180. Otvos JD, Jeyarajah EJ, Bennett DW, Krauss RM. Development of a proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic method for determining plasma lipoprotein concentrations and subspecies distributions from a single, rapid measurement. Clin Chem. 1992;38:1632-1638. Goto A, Sasai K, Suzuki S, et al. Cholesteryl ester transfer protein and atherosclerosis in Japanese subjects: a study based on coronary angiography. Atherosclerosis. 2000;153:469-476. Austin MA. Triglyceride, small, dense low-density lipoprotein, and the atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2000;2:200-207. Pascot A, Lemieux I, Bergeron J, et al. HDL particle size: a marker of the gender difference in the metabolic risk profile. Atherosclerosis. 2002;160:399-406. Okumura K, Matsui H, Kamiya H, et al. Differential effect of two common polymorphisms in the cholesteryl ester transfer protein gene on low-density lipoprotein particle size. Atherosclerosis. 2002;161:469-477. Blake GJ, Otvos JD, Rifai N, Ridker PM. Low-density lipoprotein particle concentration and size as determined by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy as predictors of cardiovascular disease in women. Circulation. 2002;106:1930-1937. Asztalos BF, Horvath KV, McNamara JR, et al. Effects of atorvastatin on the HDL subpopulation profile of coronary heart disease patients. J Lipid Res. 2002;43:1701-1707. Gudnason V, Kakko S, Nicaud V, et al. Cholesteryl ester transfer protein gene effect on CETP activity and plasma high-density lipoprotein in European populations: the EARS group. Eur J Clin Invest. 1999;29:116-128. Grundy SM, Vega GL, Otvos JD, et al. Hepatic lipase activity influences high density lipoprotein subclass distribution in normotriglyceridemic men: genetic and pharmacological evidence. J Lipid Res. 1999;40:229-234. Kraus WE, Houmard JA, Duscha BD, et al. Effects of the amount and intensity of exercise on plasma lipoproteins. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1483-1492. Barzilai N, Gupta G. Revisiting the role of fat mass in the life extension induced by caloric restriction. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 199