HLA-DR alleles have sex-dependent effects on survival and can differentiate between individual and familial longevity. The study compared the genotypic distributions of HLA-DRB1 polymorphisms between longevous and adult control groups in the French population. The longevous groups included two independent cohorts with 533 centenarians and 163 nonagenarian siblings. The allelic distributions were significantly different between the controls and longevous groups. Three individual alleles, DR7, DR11, and DR13, were mainly responsible for these differences.

Multivariate logistic analyses were performed to sort out interactions between gender- and age-specific genetic effects. DR7 frequency was higher in longevous men, in centenarians as well as nonagenarian siblings [OR = 1.72 (1.22-5)]. DR11's influence on longevity displayed a significant interaction with sex, with an increase in women from longevous sibships [OR = 2.03 (1.43-3.0)]. DR13's frequency was higher in centenarians of both genders [OR = 1.46 (1.21-1.75)]. These results are discussed concerning other pathophysiological effects of the implicated alleles.

The data supported the direct involvement of three HLA-DR alleles in survival at very old ages. Two allele-specific effects on longevity appear to depend on gender, and one on familial status for aggregation of this trait—the latter being an original finding for humans.

Genotypes have strong influences on lifespan in mice (7,8). In the last 25 years, many studies have searched for the impact of polymorphic HLA genes on human longevity (9-16). These studies have yielded conflicting results so that no clear consensus has been reached concerning the role of genetic variation at the HLA locus in longevity.

Major methodological problems account for the confusion in this field: (i) sample sizes are often insufficient to reach statistically significant conclusions considering the large number of alleles examined; (ii) age cut-offs for inclusion differ from study to study and may not be old enough for finding genetic effects on survival; (iii) sex is not always taken into account; (iv) matching between the old and the control populations is not always checked; and (v) the loci investigated within the HLA region differ from study to study.

Drawing examples from three studies that reported no effect of HLA loci on survival, one examined 182 individuals aged 70-93 years with no mention of sex (10), another included 18 males and 41 females >80 years old, of whom three males and seven females were >90 years (11), and a third examined 228 subjects aged 58-86 years with a median age of 68 and no mention of sex (14).

Proust et al. looked at HLA-A, -B, -C, and -DR specificities in 55 male and 100 female nonagenarians from France with mean ages >93 (12). They found that certain HLA-C alleles were increased in either male or female nonagenarians, and a haplotype bearing DR3 was increased in male nonagenarians. No difference could be detected without taking sex into account.

Takata et al. looked at HLA-A, -B, -C, -DR, and -DQ specificities in 82 centenarians and 20 nonagenarians from Japan comprising 22 males and 80 females (15). They found a decrease of DR9 and an increase of DR1 alleles in longevous individuals.

Lagaay et al. included 964 subjects >85 years old from Leiden, comprising 278 males and 686 females in what remains the largest-scale study to this date (16). These were compared with a control group, composed of 2444 young adults, for HLA-A, -B, -C, -DR, and -DQ specificities. The only emerging results were a decrease in B40 and an increase in DR5 in the 85+ women.

Altogether, it appears that effects on survival beyond age 90 of genetic variation at the HLA-DR locus were found whenever sex was taken into account, whereas they went undetected when sex was not considered. It may be relevant that in mice, where MHC effects on survival were first documented (7,17), MHC haplotypes have strong influences on fertility, fecundity, anatomy of reproductive organs and reproductive senescence (18). Therefore, there were strong grounds a priori to discriminate according to sex in the analysis.

There are no sex-related differences in HLA-DR allele frequencies in control populations, a fact well-established and directly verified here for the Paris and Strasbourg groups (P > 0.7 in a c2-test comparing the distributions between genders in a group totaling 1302 individuals).

Genotyped for HLA-DRB1 alleles, the following work pertains to the 13 generic DRB1 alleles, which are simply named after the generic DR specificities, such as DR3. Genotypes were gathered from adult blood donors (aged 20-60) in seven regions of France, totaling 2950 controls. The allele distributions for the different populations are given in Table 1. Fluctuations of certain allele frequencies occurred in several regions, but there was no significant overall heterogeneity among the distributions in control populations (P > 0.4 for a c2 test, df = 84). Therefore, genotypic data for controls were pooled in all subsequent calculations. In contrast, a comparison between centenarians and pooled controls revealed significant heterogeneity in the HLA-DR allele distributions (P < 0.05, c2 = 24 for df = 12). Four sets of longevous individuals were distinguished: male or female centenarians (VIE), male or female nonagenarian siblings (SIB).

Table 1 shows HLA-DRB1 allele frequencies in different regions of France. Subjects were genotyped at the DNA level in all groups except Marseille and Montpellier, for which results were from serotyping. For these last two groups, allele frequencies were computed from antigenic frequencies, whereas they were directly provided for other groups.

Table 2 shows HLA-DRB1 allele frequencies among controls and long-lived groups. When two or more nonagenarians of the same sex were genotyped in a family, all genotypes were taken into account and weighed so that in every case two alleles per family were counted.

Table 3 shows homozygosity in control and longevous groups. Homozygotes are given for two control groups for which individual genotypes were available. Adult populations are in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The slight departure from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in centenarians does not reach statistical significance. However, the rate of homozygosity is significantly higher in centenarians than in controls (P < 0.01 for this one comparison).

HLA-DR homozygotes were more frequent in centenarians than in controls (16.3% versus 11.1%, P < 0.01) both in males (18.2%) and females (15.8%), as shown in Table 3. The proportion of homozygotes in centenarians was also slightly, but not significantly, higher than the proportion expected from allele frequencies under Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Both observations suggested a survival advantage of homozygotes in individual centenarians. The proportion of homozygotes was not higher in the SIB groups (11.3% and 11.7% in men and women SIB, respectively), nor was it higher in the SIB-centenarians (10.7%).

In order to estimate the statistical significance of the allelic associations, taking into account putative interactions between gender and specific alleles in the effect on survival, we applied a model of logistic regression. Computations were done for each allele, comparing controls with either VIE or SIB groups. Allele frequencies were assumed to be identical in male or female adult controls.

Table 4 shows sex-genotype interaction and odds ratios for associated alleles. Results are presented for the seven most common alleles, including the only three comparisons out of 13 that reached statistical significance, namely for alleles DR7, DR11 and DR13.

One year after obtaining the above data, our collection of centenarians had grown and we decided to evaluate the previously identified associations in a new cohort. Therefore, 208 more centenarians were genotyped, 185 women and 23 men. The allelic distributions were again significantly different between controls and this second cohort of centenarians (P < 0.05, c2 = 22 for df = 12), whereas the distributions were similar in the two cohorts of centenarians. The male-specific increase in DR7 was observed (23.9%) and almost reached significance, despite the small number of male centenarians. The increase in DR13 was too (17.8%, P < 0.05 for the allele-specific comparison controls and this new cohort). Since the previously distribution pattern in centenarians was conserved, we entitled to merge the two cohorts into one population - 533 centenarians, 89 men, and 444 women. Table 5 shows the overall allele frequencies. The logistic regression applied to these data provides a better estimate of ORs for the interaction with sex was now detected as for DR7, with an OR of 1.72 (95% CI: 1.19-2.5, P = 0.004) for male centenarians. DR13 displayed no sex but(0.81-6, P = 0.5). DR4 was not assessed. The odds ratios (OR) and their corresponding confidence intervals (CI) were calculated for DR4 (0.98, 0.78-1.26, P = 0.93), DR7 (1.52, 0.92-2.5, P = 0.1), DR11 (0.56, 0.27-1.18, P = 0.13), DR13 (1.0, 0.61-1.7, P = 0.99), and DR15 (1.14, 0.59-2.2, P = 0.7). For DR4, the assessment was not carried out due to reasons unspecified in the text.
Table 5 shows the HLA-DRB1 allele frequencies and homozygotes in controls and pooled centenarians of both sexes. Homozygotes were found to be significantly more frequent in centenarians of both genders than in controls and exceeded the proportion expected under the assumption of Hardy Weinberg equilibrium.
The study aimed to assess the contributions of individual alleles to longevity and their putative interaction with sex in this contribution using a log-linear model that compared either centenarians or nonagenarian siblings with adult controls for each allele. The allele-specific effects reached statistical significance for three alleles: DR7, DR11, and DR13.
DR7 emerged as a risk factor for CMV infection, chronic HBV infection, chronic B-cell lymphocytosis in French women, celiac disease in three independent populations from Spain, France and Ireland, Crohn's disease in a population from Germany and long-QT syndrome characterized by syncope and fatal ventricular arrhythmias; while it has proven protective against gold salt toxicity in rheumatoid arthritis treatment and disease progression in psoriatic arthritis.
In conclusion, the study presents evidence of a direct role of HLA-DR alleles in differential susceptibility to a vast array of pathologies. The penetrance of HLA-DR genotypes in disease phenotypes is commonly found to depend on sex. The authors suggest that the existence of a homozygous advantage at the HLA-DR locus, at least very late in life, warrants further investigation.versus 15.6%) DR11 increased in females (12% versus 22%) DR11 not significantly different in males (14.3% versus 15.6%)

In males, the class III region gradually disappears with age. We are not aware of any published data that mentions increased heterozygosity at the HLA-DR locus in association with aging. On the contrary, Takata et al. noted an increase of HLA-DR homozygotes in their centenarians (15). They remarked that a bias for homozygosity may stem from imperfect matching between centenarians and controls, the former coming from a more rural background and less admixed population. However, we note that the rate of homozygosity was not increased in the nonagenarian SIB group, for which the same argument would apply.

We found a significant increase of HLA-DR11 in women belonging to long-lived sibships but not in centenarians. Lagaay et al. found that the association with DR5 in longevous women was entirely borne by DR11 when DR5 was split into its subtypes DR11 and DR12 (16). Our results may allow distinguishing between individual and familial longevity for the first time. Large-scale genealogic studies have demonstrated a correlation between fertility and longevity and shown that longevity is more correlated among siblings of the same sex, especially female siblings (57,58).

The prevalence of thyroid disorders is higher in females, and it is interesting that centenarians were found to have lower levels of thyroid auto-antibodies than elderly subjects in the 70-85 years range (43), which could be a clue to underlying genetic factors. Evolutionary considerations lead us to think that this clustering is not merely coincidental and that one may indeed expect epistasis between closely linked variants on life cycle traits, including lifespan (63). The challenge, typical of HLA associations, will be to distinguish primary effects from secondary associations due to linkage disequilibrium (64,65). Other loci are currently under investigation in the HLA region. The involvement of HLA in longevity may well turn out to be exemplary, in complexity as well as instructiveness.

Centenarians were individuals in their 100th year recruited in the French population solely on the basis of chronological age: >99 years on the day of blood collection (3) (mean age: 100.9 0.35, 101.25 0.21, 101.2 0.18 for male, female and overall groups, respectively). These figures are the average for the complete cohort of 533 centenarians: the first cohort of 325 centenarians comprises samples collected from 1991 to 1994, while samples from the second cohort of 208 centenarians were collected later.

Longevous siblings were recruited according to our set criterion for familial longevity: at least two longevous members in the sibship, i.e., >90 years old for men and >95 years old for women (mean age: 93.4 0.78, 95.7 1.05 and 94.7 0.69 for male, female and overall groups, respectively). The 229 nonagenarians that compose our SIB group belong to 127 different sibships.

Control adults had donated blood at different regional immunology centers throughout the country, and genotypic data were kindly provided by these centers. HLA-DR allele distributions have been published for Marseille (66) and Bretagne (67) populations.

Differences between the long-lived groups VIE and SIB are summarized in Table 6. Three alternative interpretations of these differences are possible: (i) they indicate different genetic components for familial and individual longevity, (ii) they merely reflect sampling fluctuations, or (iii) they arise from the age difference between the two groups. The second alternative cannot be dismissed until an independent SIB cohort is examined. If the familial effect holds true, it may even be underestimated here for want of reliable information on the families of most centenarians in the VIE group.

Taken together, these data provide compelling evidence for direct influences on survival of three HLA-DR variants, taking sex-specific effects into account. Common features may be observed concerning the two variants that display sex-dependent effects: they are associated with sex-specific pathologies, particularly with lymphoproliferative diseases. Their associations with longevity may provide interesting examples of antagonistic pleiotropy (55), whereby the same allele has negative and positive effects on survival, the latter taking the edge very late in life. It is anecdotal that the oldest male centenarian in our cohort, who lived to 111 years, was homozygous for DR7.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Subjects

Centenarians were individuals in their 100th year recruited in the FrenchVersus 11%), DR11 is not affected in females (11.8% versus 13.1%). DR11 increased in females (23.4% versus 13.1%). DR13 increased in both genders (17.7% versus 12.8%). DR13 is not affected in any gender (12.2% versus 12.8%). There is an increased homozygosity (15% versus 11.1%) and no difference in homozygosity (11.5% versus 11.1%). 

Toro, A.I., and Ossa, J. "PCR activity of CMV in healthy CMV-seropositive individuals: does latency need a redefinition?" Res. Virol., Smith, G.S., and Walford, R.L. "Influence of the main histocompatibility complex on ageing in mice." Nature, Yunis, E.J., and Salazar, M. "Genetics of lifespan in mice." Genetica, Macurova, H., Ivanyi, P., Sajdlova, H., and Trojan, J. "HLA antigens in aged persons." Tissue Antigens, Drouet, E., Colimon, R., Michelson, S., Fourcade, N., Niveleau, A., Ducere, C., Boibieux, A., Chevallier, M., and Denoyel, G. "Monitoring levels of human cytomegalovirus DNA in blood after liver transplantation." J. Clin. Microbiol., Yarnell, J.W., St Leger, A.S., Balfour, I.C., and Russell R.B. "The distribution, age effects and disease associations of HLA antigens and other blood group markers in a random sample of an elderly population." J. Chron. Dis., Proust, J., Moulias, R., Fumeron, F., Bekkhoucha, F., Busson, M., Schmid, M., and Hors, J. "HLA and longevity." Tissue Antigens, Gerkins, V.R., Ting, A., and Menck, H.T. "HLA heterozygosity as a genetic marker of long-term survival." J. Natl Cancer Inst., Blackwelder, W.C., Mittal, K.K., Mamara, P.M., and Payne, F.J. "Lack of association between HLA and age in an aging population." Tissue Antigens, Takata, H., Suzuki, M., Ishii, T., Sekiguchi, S., and Iri, H. "Influence of major histocompatibility complex region genes on human longevity among Okinawan-Japanese centenarians and nonagenarians." Lancet Lagaay, A.M., D'Amato, J., Ligthart, G.J., Schreuder, G.M., Van Rood, J.J., and Hijmans W. "Longevity and heredity in humans. Association with the human leukocyte antigen phenotype." Ann. NY Acad. Sci., Yunis E.J., Watson A., Gelman S.L., Sylvia S.L., Bronson R. and Dorf D.E. "Traits that influence longevity in mice." Genetics Lerner S.P. and Finch C.E. "The major histocompatibility complex and reproductive functions." Endocrine Rev. Gozlan J., Laporte J.P., Lesage S., Labopin M., Najman A.G. and Petit J.C. "Monitoring of cytomegalovirus infection and disease in bone marrow recipients by reverse transcription-PCR and comparison with PCR and blood and urine cultures." J. Clin. Microbiol., Grundy, J.E., Ehrnst, A., Einsele, H., Emery, V.C., Hebart, H., Prentice, H.G., and Ljungman P. "A three-center European external quality control study of PCR detection of cytomegalovirus DNA in blood." J. Clin. Microbiol., Dorak, M.T., Mills, K.I., Gaffney, D., Wilson, D.W.L., Henderson, N., and Burnett A.K. "Homozygous MHC genotypes and longevity." Hum. Hered., Lepage V., Lamm L.U., and Charron D. "Molecular aspects of HLA class II and some autoimmune diseases." Eur. J. Immunogenet., Meyer J.M., Han J., Singh R., and Moxley G. "Sex influences on the penetrance of HLA shared-epitope genotypes for rheumatoid arthritis." Am. J. Hum. Genet., Tait B.D., Harrison L.C., Drummond B.P., Stewart V., VarneyHynninen, A., Heikkinen, J., Ehnholm, C., Koistinen, M.J. and Kesaniemi, Y.A. (year unknown) "Apolipoprotein E and B polymorphisms: longevity factors assessed in nonagenarians." Atherosclerosis.

Mari, D., Mannucci, P.M., Duca, F., Bertolini, S. and Franceschi, C. (year unknown) "Mutant factor V (Arg Gln) in healthy centenarians." Lancet.

Almarri, A. and Batchelor, J.R. (year unknown) "HLA and hepatitis B infection."

Weitkamp, L.R., Moss, A.J., Lewis, R.A., Hall, W.J., Maluer, Schwartz, P.J., Locati, E.H., Tzivoni, D., Vincent, G.M., Robinson, J.L. et al. (year unknown) "Analysis of HLA and disease susceptibility: chromosome genes sex influence long-QT phenotype." Am. J. Hum. Genet.

Fernandez-Arquero, M., Figueredo, M.A., Maluenda, C. and de la EG (year unknown) "HLA-linked genes acting as additive susceptibility factors celiac disease." Hum. Immunol.

Meddeb-Garnaoui, A., Zeliszewski, D., Mougenot, J.F., Djilali-Saiah, Caillat-Zucman, S., Dormoy, A., Gaudebout, C., Tongio, M.M., Baudon and Sterkers, G. (year unknown) "Reevaluation of the relative risk for susceptibility celiac disease of HLA-DRB , -DQA , -DQB , -DPB , and -TAP alleles in a French population." Hum. Immunol.

Michalski, J.P., Mombs, C.C., Arai, T., Elston, R.C., Cao, T., CF and Stevens, F.M. (year unknown) "HLA-DR, DQ genotypes of celiac patients and healthy subjects from the West of Ireland." Tissue Antigens.

Sollid, L.M. and Thorsby, E. (year unknown) "The primary association of celiac to a given HLA-DQa/b heterodimer explains the divergent associations observed in various Caucasian populations." Tissue Antigens.

Reinshagen, M., Loeliger, C., Kuehnl, P., Weiss, U., Manfras, B.J., Alder and Boehm, B.O. (year unknown) "HLA class II gene frequencies in Crohn's disease: population-based analysis in Germany." Gut.

Troussard, X., Valensi, F., Debert, C., Maynadie, M., Schillinger, P., Macintyre, EA and Flandrin, G. (year unknown) "Persistent polyclonal cytosis with binucleated B lymphocytes: a genetic predisposition." Br. Haematol.

Rodriguez Perez, M., Gonzalez Dominguez, J., Mataran Perez, L. and Salvatierra Rios, D. (year unknown) "HLA DR as a protective factor against gold toxicity in rheumatoid arthritis." Ann. Med. Intern.

Gladman, DD and Farewell, VT. (year unknown) "The role of HLA antigens indicators of disease progression in psoriatic arthritis: multivariate risk model." Arthritis Rheum.

Yanagawa, T., Mangklabruks, A. and De Groot LJ. (year unknown) "Association between HLA-DQA * and Graves disease in a Caucasian population." J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.

Rigopoulou, D., Martinez-Laso, J., Martinez-Tello, F., Alcaide, J.F., Mar, D., Hawkins, F. and Arnaiz-Villena, A. (year unknown) "Both class I and class HLA antigens are thyroid cancer susceptibility factors." Tissue Antigen.

Mariotti, S., Sansoni, P., Barbesino, G., Caturegli, P., Monti, D., A., Giacomelli, T., Passeri, G., Fagiolo, U., Pinchera, A. and Franceschi (year unknown) "Thyroid and other organ-specific autoantibodies in healthy ians." Lancet.

Colombe, B.W., Price, V.H., Khoury, E.L., Garovoy, M.R. and Lou (year unknown) "HLA class II antigen associations help to define two types of alopecia areata." J. Am